Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
Available online 26 January 2024
0079-6107/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
A landscape of consciousness: Toward a taxonomy of explanations
and implications
Robert Lawrence Kuhn
Closer To Truth (TV & Web), United States
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Consciousness
Mind-body problem
Materialism
Monism
Dualism
Idealism
A B S T R A C T
Diverse explanations or theories of consciousness are arrayed on a roughly physicalist-to-nonphysicalist land-
scape of essences and mechanisms. Categories: Materialism Theories (philosophical, neurobiological, electro-
magnetic field, computational and informational, homeostatic and affective, embodied and enactive, relational,
representational, language, phylogenetic evolution); Non-Reductive Physicalism; Quantum Theories; Integrated
Information Theory; Panpsychisms; Monisms; Dualisms; Idealisms; Anomalous and Altered States Theories;
Challenge Theories. There are many subcategories, especially for Materialism Theories. Each explanation is self-
described by its adherents, critique is minimal and only for clarification, and there is no attempt to adjudicate
among theories. The implications of consciousness explanations or theories are assessed with respect to four
questions: meaning/purpose/value (if any); AI consciousness; virtual immortality; and survival beyond death. A
Landscape of Consciousness, I suggest, offers perspective.
Explanations of consciousness abound and the radical diversity of
theories is telling. Explanations, or theories, are said to work at aston-
ishingly divergent orders of magnitude and putative realms of reality.
My purpose here must be humble: collect and categorize, not assess and
adjudicate.1 Seek insights, not answers.
Unrealistically, I’d like to get them all, at least all contemporary
theories that are sufficiently distinct with explanations that can sur-
mount an arbitrary hurdle of rationality or conceivability.2 Falsification
or verification is not on the agenda. I’m less concerned about the
ontological truth of explanations/theories3 than in identifying them and
then locating them on a “Landscape”4 to enable categorization and
assess relationships. Next, I assesss implications of categories for “big
questions.” Thus, this Landscape is not about how consciousness is
measured or evolved or even works, but about what consciousness is and
what difference it makes.
It’s the classic “mind-body problem:” How do the felt experiences in
our minds relate to the neural processes in our brains? How do mental
states, whether sensory, cognitive, emotional, or even noumenal (self-
less) awareness, correlate with brain states? The Landscape of Con-
sciousness explanations or theories I want to draw is as broad as
possible, including those that cannot be subsumed by, and possibly not
even accessed by, the scientific method. This freedom from constraint, as
it were, is no excuse for wooly thinking. Standards of rationality and
clarity of argument must be maintained even more tenaciously, and
bases of beliefs must be specified even more clearly.
I have two main aims: (i) gather and describe the various theories
E-mail address: RLKUHN@icloud.com.
1 Feedback is appreciated, especially explanations or theories of consciousness not included, or not described accurately, or not classified properly; also, modi-
fications of the classification typology. “A Landscape of Consciousness” is a work-in-progress, permanently.
2 I make no attempt to be exhaustive historically: while Bohm, Jung, Aquinas, Aurobindo, and Dao De Jing are included; Plato, the Psalmist, Nagarjuna, Confucius,
and the Apostle Paul are not.
3 I use “explanation” and “theory” interchangeably, though I chose “explanations,” not “theories,” for the subtitle. “Theories” range from the “Theory of Relativity”
with high precision, to theories in the life and social sciences with confidence levels that vary wildly, to “I have a theory” (meaning “I have an idea,” about anything,
say, why my favorite sports team keeps losing). Other terms are “hypothesis,” an initial idea to guide research, and “model,” a simplification of the real world to
isolate and test insights. All these terms have precise definitions in the literature (see Daniel Stoljar, Kind and Stoljar, 2023, pp. 112–113). But on this Landscape
everyone picks their own term. Most pick “theory,” in part because they really believe their baby is beautiful. No matter the term, we are all after the same goal: the
foundation(s) of consciousness.
4 Deliberately, “A Landscape ….” not “The Landscape ….” I acknowledge, with pleasure, precedent to Leonard Susskind’s pioneering The Cosmic Landscape (string
theory structures and the anthropic principle).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pbiomolbio
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2023.12.003
Received 4 June 2023; Received in revised form 12 September 2023; Accepted 25 December 2023
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
29
and array them in some kind of meaningful structure of high-level or
first-order categories (and under Materialism, subcategories); and (ii)
assess their implications, with respect to four big questions: meaning/
purpose/value (if any); artificial intelligence (AI) consciousness; virtual
immortality; and survival beyond death.
Theories overlap; some work together. Moreover, while a real-world
landscape of consciousness, even simplified, would be drawn with three
dimensions (at least), with multiple kinds and levels of nestings—a
combinatorial explosion (and likely no closer to truth)—I satisfice with a
one-dimensional toy-model. I array all the theories on a linear spectrum,
simplistically and roughly, from the “most physical” on the left (at the
beginning) to the “least physical” on the right (near the end).5 (I have
two final categories after this spectrum.) The physicalism assumed in
Materialism Theories of consciousness is characterized by naturalistic,
science-based perspectives, while non-materialism theories have various
degrees of nonphysicalist perspectives outside the ambit of current sci-
ence and in some cases not subject to the scientific method of experi-
mentation and replicability.
Please do not ascribe the relative importance of a theory to the
relative size of its description. The shortest can be the strongest. It
sometimes takes more words to describe lesser-known theories. For each
description I feel the tension between conciseness and completeness.
Moreover, several are not complete theories in themselves but ways to
think about consciousness that strike me as original and perhaps
insightful.
I have followed consciousness studies in its various forms for my
entire life. My PhD is in neurophysiology (thalamocortical evoked po-
tentials).6 I am creator and host of Closer To Truth,7 the long-running
public television series and web resource on science and philosophy,
roughly one-third of which focuses on consciousness and brain/mind
topics.8 I have discussed consciousness with over 200 scientists and
philosophers who work on or think about consciousness and related
fields (Closer To Truth YouTube; Closer To Truth website).9
I use these Closer To Truth discussions as resources. I want to give feel
and flavor, as well as propositions and arguments, for the astonishingly
diverse attitudes and approaches to consciousness coming from radically
diverse perspectives and worldviews. That’s why I use spontaneous
quotes from verbal conversations along with meticulous quotes from
academic papers.
In one early Closer To Truth episode, “What are the Big Questions of
Science,” philosopher Patricia Churchland gave the bluntest answer:
“Out of meat, how do you get thought? That’s the grandest question.”
She distinguishes two major questions. One is whether psychological
states—our mental life of remembering, thinking, creating—are really a
subset of brain activity? The other is how do high-level psychological
processes come about from basic neurophysiological actions? “How do
brain cells, organized in their complex ways, give rise to my watching
something move, or seeing color, or smelling a rose”(Churchland, 2000;
Kuhn, 2000a, 2000b).
Philosopher David Papineau distinguishes three questions related to
consciousness: How?, Where?, and What? “First, how does consciousness
relate to other features of reality? Second, where are conscious phe-
nomena located in reality? And, third, what is the nature of conscious-
ness?” (Papineau, 2020a). Because this Landscape is structured by
theories of consciousness, not by philosophical questions, each theory
sets its own agenda for dealing with the three questions, mostly, of
course, focusing on the How?
Philosopher Thomas Nagel sees more a fundamental conundrum and
he frames it crisply. “We have at present no conception of how a single
event or thing could have both physical or phenomenological aspects, or
how if it did they could be related” (Nagel, 1986). In his influential
paper, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?,” Nagel offers, “Without con-
sciousness the mind-body problem would be much less interesting. With
consciousness it seems hopeless” (Nagel, 1974).
“Hopeless,” to me, is invigorating; I’m up for the “hopeless chal-
lenge.” Take all that follows as my personal journey of consciousness;
idiosyncratic, to be sure; not all for everyone, not set in cement.
1. Chalmers’s “hard problem” of consciousness
Philosopher David Chalmers famously characterized the core
conundrum of explaining consciousness—accounting for “qualia,” our
qualitatively rendered interior experience of motion-picture-like
perception and cognitive awareness—by memorializing the pithy,
potent phrase, “the hard problem.” This is where most contemporary
theories commence and well they should (Section: Chalmers, 1995b,
1996, 2007; 2014a; 2014b; 2016b).
It is no exaggeration to say that Chalmer’s 1995 paper, “Facing up to
the problem of consciousness” (Chalmers, 1995b) and his 1996 book,
The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory (Chalmers, 1996),
were watershed moments in consciousness studies, challenging the
conventional wisdom of the prevailing materialist-reductionist world-
view and altering the dynamics of the field. His core argument against
materialism, in its original form, is deceptively (and delightfully)
simple:
1. In our world, there are conscious experiences.
2. There is a logically possible world physically identical to ours, in
which the positive facts about consciousness in our world do not
hold.
3. Therefore, facts about consciousness are further facts about our
world, over and above the physical facts.
4. So, materialism is false.
This is the famous “Zombie Argument” (infamous to some): whether
creatures absolutely identical to us in every external measure, but with
no internal light, no inner subjective experience, are “conceivable”—the
argument turning on the meaning and implications of “conceivable” and
the difference between conceivable and possible. (It can be claimed that
the Zombie Argument for consciousness being nonphysical, like the
Ontological Argument for God actually existing, sneaks the conclusion
into one of the premises.)
Chalmers asks, “Why does it feel like something inside? Why is our
brain processing—vast neural circuits and computational mecha-
nisms—accompanied by conscious experience? Why do we have this
amazing, entertaining inner movie going on in our minds?” (All quotes not
referenced are from Closer To Truth videos on www.closertotruth.com,
including 2007, 2014a, 2014b, 2016b.)
Key indeed are qualia, our internal, phenomenological, felt experi-
ence—the sight of your newborn daughter, bundled up; the sound of
Mahler’s Second Symphony, fifth movement, choral finale; the smell of
garlic, cooking in olive oil. Qualia—the felt qualities of inner experi-
ence—are the crux of the mind-body problem.
Chalmers describes qualia as “the raw sensations of experience.” He
says, “I see colors—reds, greens, blues—and they feel a certain way to
me. I see a red rose; I hear a clarinet; I smell mothballs. All of these feel a
5 My typology is arbitrary, and any association with political connotations of
“left” and “right” is coincidental and comical.
6 UCLA Department of Anatomy and Brain Research Institute, 1964–1968.
7 Closer To Truth is co-created, produced and directed by Peter Getzels.
8 Closer To Truth features over 100 TV episodes and over 1500 video in-
terviews on consciousness and related topics, issues and questions in brain and
mind, such as free will, personal identity, and alien intelligences. Closer To
Truth website, www.closertotruth.com and Closer To Truth YouTube channel,
www.youtube.com/@CloserToTruthTV.
9 In addition, viewers globally send me their theories on consciousness: some
are coherent, a few are original, all are passionate. I consider them all—most,
admittedly, I skim—and I learn some, enriching the Landscape. There seems a
sharp division: those striving to develop purely physicalist explanations (how-
ever complex), and those taking consciousness as in some sense fundamental
(whether motivated by religion, parapsychology or philosophy).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
30
certain way to me. You must experience them to know what they’re like.
You could provide a perfect, complete map of my brain [down to
elementary particles]—what’s going on when I see, hear, smell—but if I
haven’t seen, heard, smelled for myself, that brain map is not going to
tell me about the quality of seeing red, hearing a clarinet, smelling
mothballs. You must experience it.”
Since qualia constitutes the core of the “hard problem,” and since the
hard problem has come to so dominate consciousness studies such that
almost every theorist must confront it, seeking either to explain it or
refute it—and since the hard problem is a leitmotiv of this Landscape—I
asked Dave about its backstory.
“I first remember presenting the hard problem in a talk at the first
Tucson ‘Toward a Science of Consciousness’ consciousness in 1994.
When did I first use it? Did I use it in writing before then? I’ve looked
in my writing and have not found it [i.e., not prior to the 1994 talk].
The hard problem was part of the talk. I remember speaking with
some students beforehand, saying I’m going to talk about ‘hard
problems, easy problems.’ I had been already talking this way in my
seminar the previous year, so maybe it was already becoming part of
my thinking. But I didn’t think about it as an ‘insight.’ I just thought
it a way of stating the obvious. ‘Yeah, there’s a really hard problem
here.’ So, as part of the first couple of minutes of my talk, I said
something like ‘everyone knows there is a hard problem’ …. And
people took it and said ‘it’s this great insight’ … Well, it did become a
catchy meme; it became a way of encapsulating the problem of
consciousness in a way that made it difficult to ignore, and I’m
grateful for that role. I had no idea at the time that it would catch on,
but it’s good because the problem of consciousness is really easy to
ignore or to sidestep, and having this phrase, ‘the hard problem,’ has
made it difficult to do that. There’s now just a very natural response
whenever that happens. You say, ‘Well, that’s addressing the easy
problem, but it’s not addressing the hard problem.’ I think this helps
in getting both scientists and philosophers to take consciousness
seriously. But I can’t take credit for the idea. Everyone knew that
consciousness was a hard problem way before me—my colleagues,
Tom Nagel and Ned Block; philosophers like C.D. Broad almost 100
years ago; Thomas Huxley back in the 19th century; even Leibniz and
Descartes—they all knew that consciousness was a hard problem”
(Chalmers, 2016b).
Over the years, while Chalmers has played a leading role in
expanding and enriching the field of consciousness studies (Chalmers,
2018), his overarching views have not changed: “I don’t think the hard
problem of consciousness can be solved purely in terms of neurosci-
ence.” As science journalist George Musser puts it, “By ‘hard,’ Chalmers
meant impossible. Science as we now practice it, he argued, ‘is inher-
ently unable to explain consciousness’” (Musser, 2023a,b).
This does not mean, of course, that Chalmers is making a case for
“substance dualism,” some nonphysical stuff (like the immortal souls of
many religions). Chalmers is postulating a “naturalistic dualism,” where
perhaps “information” is the connective, because while information is
not material, it is embedded in the physical world. He notes, “We can
also find information realized in our phenomenology.” This is a “natu-
ralistic dualism,” a kind of property dualism (15.1).
To Chalmers, “It is natural to hope that there will be a materialist
solution to the hard problem and a reductive explanation of con-
sciousness, just as there have been reductive explanations of many other
phenomena in many other domains. But consciousness seems to resist
materialist explanation in a way that other phenomena do not.” He
encapsulates this resistance in three related arguments against materi-
alism: (i) The Explanatory Argument (“explaining structure and function
does not suffice to explain consciousness”); (ii) The Conceivability
Argument (“it is conceivable that there be a system that is physically
identical to a conscious being, but that lacks at least some of that being’s
conscious states”); (iii) The Knowledge Argument (“someone could
know all the physical facts … and still be unable to know all the facts
about consciousness”) (Chalmers, 2003).
“Physicalists, of course, resist these arguments,” says Philosopher
Frank Jackson. “Some deny the modal and epistemic claims the argu-
ments use as premises. They may grant (as they should) the intuitive
appeal of the claim that a zombie physical duplicate of me is possible,
but insist that, when one looks at the matter more closely, one can see
that a zombie physical duplicate of me is not in fact possible. Any
physical duplicate of me must feel pain when they stub their toe, have
things look green to them on occasion, and so on” (Jackson, 2023).
Philosopher Daniel Stoljar targets the conceivability argument (“CA”).
Strictly speaking, he says, “CA is an argument against the truth of phys-
icalism. However, since it presupposes the existence of consciousness, it
may be regarded also as an argument for the incompatibility of physi-
calism and the existence of consciousness.” Stoljar’s epistemic view offers
a two-part response. “The first part supposes that there is a type of
physical fact or property that is relevant to consciousness but of which we
are ignorant.” He calls this the ignorance hypothesis. The second part
“argues that, if the ignorance hypothesis is true, CA is unpersuasive” for
reasons of logic (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, pp. 92, 95).
Philosopher Yujin Nagasawa calls “The Knowledge Argument”
(Jackson, 1982, 1986, 1995, 1998) “among the strongest arguments (or
possibly the strongest argument) for the claim that there is [in con-
sciousness] something beyond the physical” (Nagasawa, 2012a). Based
on a thought experiment by Frank Jackson, it imagines “Mary, a brilliant
scientist,” who lives entirely in a black-and-white room, who acquires all
physical, scientific knowledge about color—wavelengths of light in all
detail—“but it seems obvious that when she comes outside her room, she
learns something completely new, namely, what is like to see color.”
Prior to seeing the color, “she doesn’t have phenomenal knowledge of
conscious experience.” While Jackson himself no longer endorses the
argument, it is still regarded as one of the most important arguments
against physicalism, though of course it has its critics (Garfield, 1996).
Nagasawa, who did his PhD under Jackson, responds to critics of the
argument (Nagasawa, 2010), but also offers his own objections and
novel proposals (Nagasawa, 2008).
Frank Jackson himself has much of the contemporary literature on
consciousness revolving around three questions. “Does the nature of
conscious experience pose special problems for physicalism? Is the na-
ture of conscious experience exhausted by functional role? Is the nature
of conscious experience exhausted by the intentional contents or
representational nature of the relevant kinds of mental states?” (Jack-
son, 1997).
To philosopher Philip Goff, there are two aspects of consciousness
that give rise to the hard problem, qualitivity and subjectivity: qualitivity
meaning that experiences involve sensory qualities, whether in real-time
or via memory recall; subjectivity meaning that there is a subject who has
those experiences, that “these experiences are for someone: there is
something that it’s like for me to experience that deep red.” Goff argues
that these two aspects of consciousness give rise to two “hard problems.”
While either problem would be sufficient to refute materialism, he says,
the hard problem of qualitivity is more pronounced—or at least easier to
argue for—because the vocabulary of the physical sciences, which tell a
purely quantitative story of causal structures, cannot articulate the
qualities of experience; the language of physics entails an explanatory
limitation (Goff, 2021).
Philosopher Colin McGinn provides a culinary perspective: “Matter is
just the wrong kind of thing to give birth to consciousness … You might
as well assert, without further explanation, that numbers emerge from
biscuits, or ethics from rhubarb” (McGinn, 1993).
Philosopher Jerry Fodor put the problem into what he thought would
be perpetual perspective. “[We don’t know], even to a first glimmer,
how a brain (or anything else that is physical) could manage to be a
locus of conscious experience. This … is, surely, among the ultimate
metaphysical mysteries; don’t bet on anybody ever solving it” (Fodor,
1998).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
31
2. Initial thoughts
Consciousness has been a founding and primary theme of Closer To
Truth, broadcast on PBS stations since 2000 and now a global resource
on the Closer To Truth website and Closer To Truth YouTube channel.
What is consciousness? What is the deep essence of consciousness? What
is the deep cause of consciousness? (These are not the same question.)
Again, it is the core of the mind-body problem—how thoughts in our
minds and sensations of our experiences interrelate with activities in our
brains.
What does the word “consciousness” mean? What is its referent?
“Consciousness” has multiple definitions, which has been part of the
problem in its study. There are clear categories of consciousness, un-
controversially recognized. For example, distinguishing “creature con-
sciousness” (the somatic condition of being awake and responding to
stimuli) and “mental state consciousness” (the cognitive condition of
experiential engagement with the environment and oneself). More
importantly, distinguishing “phenomenal consciousness” (“what it is
like”) and “cognitive consciousness” (Humphrey, 2023a,b) or “access
consciousness”10 (Block, 2023), which are more about function than
phenomenology.
Philosopher Ned Block sees “the border between perception and
cognition” as a “joint in nature,” primed for exploration. He says he was
drawn to this subject because of the realization that the difference be-
tween what he calls “access consciousness (cognitive access to
phenomenally conscious states)” and what he calls “phenomenal con-
sciousness (what it is like to experience)” was rooted “in a difference
between perception—whether conscious or unconscious—and cognitive
access to perception” (Block, 2023).
With respect to “information,” it is suggested that “the word ‘con-
sciousness’ conflates two different types of information-processing
computations in the brain: the selection of information for global
broadcasting, thus making it flexibly available for computation and
report,” and “the self-monitoring of those computations, leading to a
subjective sense of certainty or error” (Dehaene et al., 2017). But, again,
the issue is phenomenal consciousness, and to the extent that each type
of consciousness comes with inner experience, the same issues obtain.
Artificial intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky calls consciousness “a
suitcase term,” meaning that all sorts of separate or mildly related
concepts can be packed into it. “Consciousness,” he says, “is a clever
trick that we use to keep from thinking about how thinking works. And
what we do is we take a lot of different phenomena and we give them all
the same name, and then you think you’ve got it.” Minsky enjoys dis-
secting consciousness: “When people use the word ‘consciousness,’ it’s a
very strange idea that there’s some wonderful property of the brain that
can do so many different things—at least four or five major things and
dozens of others. For example, if I ask, ‘were you conscious that you
touched your ear?’ You might say ‘no, I didn’t know I did that.’ You
might say, ‘yes.’ If you say yes, it’s because some part of your mind, the
part that talks, has access to something that remembers what’s
happened recently with your arm and your ear.” Minsky notes “there are
hundreds of kinds of awarenesses. There’s remembering something as an
image. There’s remembering something as a string of words. There’s
remembering the tactile feeling of something” (Minsky, 2007a).
Minsky says there is no harm in having consciousness as a suitcase
term for social purposes. When a word has multiple meanings, that
ambiguity is often very valuable, he says. “But if you’re trying to un-
derstand those processes and you’ve put them all in one box, then you
say, where in the brain is consciousness located? There’s a whole
community of scientists who are trying to find the place in the brain
where consciousness is. But if it’s ‘a suitcase’ and it’s just a word for
many different processes, they’re wasting their time. They should try to
find out how each of those processes works and how they’re related”
(Minsky, 2007a).
Philosopher Massimo Pigliucci points out that “you do not need
phenomenal consciousness in order to react to the environment. Plants
do it, bacteria do it, all sorts of stuff do it.” But when it comes to emotion,
he says, “Yes, you do need consciousness – in fact, that is what an
emotion is. Emotion implies some level of internal perception of what’s
going on, some awareness of the phenomenal experience” (Pigliucci,
2023a,b).
Suffice it to say that the hard problem refers to phenomenal con-
sciousness. (This is not to say, of course, that cognitive or access con-
sciousness is an “easy problem.”)
To Alex Gomez-Marin, a theoretical physicist turned behavioral
neurobiologist, “Ask not what neuroscience can do for consciousness but
what consciousness can do for neuroscience.” He laments, “When it
comes to serious proposals that offer an alternative to materialism, the
mainstream has its doors wide shut … I believe the underlying issue of
this debate is a tectonic clash about the nature of reality … In other
words, the dominant physicalist paradigm can tolerate many things
(including its own internal contradictions and empirical anomalies), but
not panpsychism, idealism, dual-aspect monism, or any other view …
Any nonmaterialist whiff in the consciousness hunger games is pun-
ished. Challenge the core foundations, and you shall be stigmatized;
propose a cutting-edge new color to the walls of the old building, you
will be cheered (Gomez-Marin, 2023).
On the other hand, philosopher Simon Blackburn cautions against
overinflating consciousness as a concept. “I wouldn’t try to approach it
by definition,” he said. “That’s going to be just a can of worms. Leibniz
said that if we could blow the brain up to the size of a mill and walk
around in it, we still wouldn’t find consciousness” (Blackburn, 2012).
To Blackburn, the hard problem is not what Chalmers says it is. “I
think the really hard problem is trying to convince ourselves that this
[consciousness problem] is, as it were, an artifact of a bad way of
thinking. The philosopher who did the most to try to persuade us of that
was Ludwig Wittgenstein; the central exhibit in his armory was a thing
called the private language argument [i.e., a language understandable
by only one person is incoherent]. Wittgenstein said if you think in terms
of consciousness in that classical way, we meet the problem of other
minds. Why should I think that you’re conscious? I know that I am, but
what about you? And if consciousness in some sense floats free, it might
sort of just come and go all over the place. As I say, the hard problem is
getting rid of the hard problem” (Blackburn, 2012).
Physicist-visionary Paul Davies disagrees. “Many scientists think that
life and consciousness are just irrelevant byproducts in a universe;
they’re just other sorts of things. I don’t like that idea. I think we’re
deeply significant. I’ve always been impressed by the fact that human
beings are not only able to observe the universe, but they’ve also come
to understand it through science and mathematics. And the fact that we
can glimpse the rules on which the universe runs—we can, as it were,
decode the cosmic code—seems to me to point to something of
extraordinary and fundamental significance” (Davies, 2006a).
To computer scientist-philosopher Jaron Lanier, “Fundamentally, we
know very little about consciousness and the process of doing science is
best served by humility. So, until we can explain this subjective expe-
rience, I think we should accept it as being there” (Lanier, 2007a).
I should note that the mind-body problem is hardly the only problem
in consciousness studies: there are myriad mind-related problems.
Topping the list of others, perhaps, is the problem of mental causation:
How can mental states affect physical states? How can thoughts make
actions?
Physicist Uzi Awret argues that explaining how consciousness acts on
the matter of the brain to “proclaim its existence” is just as hard as
explaining how matter can give rise to consciousness. In fact, the two
questions constrain each other. (For example, must panpsychists
10 The noncognitive nature of perception precludes cognitive theories of
consciousness. In particular, Block says there is an argument from one of the
cases of nonconceptual perception to the conclusion that there is phenomenal
consciousness without access consciousness.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
32
consider phenomenal powers and dualists kinds of interactionism?)
Awret makes the insightful point that one reason the two questions
should be conjoined is that they can be complementary in the sense that
explaining one makes it harder to explain the other (Awret, 2024).
Mental causation is an issue for every theory of consciousness: a
serious one for Dualism, less of so for monistic theories—Materialism,
Monisms, Idealisms, perhaps Panpsychism-—in that everything would
be made of the same stuff. Yet, still, mental causation needs explanation.
But that is not my task here.
While precise definitions of consciousness are challenging, almost
everyone agrees that the real challenge is phenomenal consciousness.
Phenomenal consciousness is the only consciousness in this Landscape.
3. Philosophical tensions
Two types of philosophical tensions pervade all efforts to understand
consciousness: (i) epistemological versus ontological perspectives, and
(ii) the nexus between correlation and causation. The former distin-
guishes what we can know from what really exists; they can be the same,
of course, but that determination may not be a superficial one and in fact
may not be possible, in practice or even in principle. The latter has an
asymmetrical relationship in that causation must involve correlation
whereas correlation does not necessarily involve causation; the dyadic
entities that correlate might each be caused by an unknown hidden
factor that just so happens to cause each of them independently.
In addition, there are questions about the phylogenetic evolution of
consciousness (9.10). Is it a gradual gradient, from simple single-cells
seeking homeostasis via stimulus-response to environmental pressures,
relatively smoothly up the phylogenetic tree to human-level con-
sciousness (as is conventional wisdom)? Or is consciousness more like a
step-function with spurts and stops? Is there a cut-off, as it were? Others,
of course, maintain that consciousness is irreducible, even fundamental
and primordial.
I give “Philosophical Tensions” its own section, however short, to
stress the explanatory burden of which every theory of consciousness
must keep cognizant: the epistemology-ontology distinction and the
correlation-causation conundrum.
4. Surveys & typologies
Philosopher Tim Bayne suggests three ways to think about what
consciousness is: (i) experience, awareness and their synonyms (Nagel’s
“what-its-like-to-be”); (ii) paradigms and examples, using specifics to
induce the general; and (iii) initial theories to circumscribe the borders
of the concept, such that a more complete definition falls out of the
theory. Examples of (iii) are conducting surveys and organizing typol-
ogies (see below) and constructing taxonomies (which is the intent of
this paper) (Bayne, 2007).
To appreciate theories of consciousness, there are superb surveys and
typologies, scientific and philosophical, that organize the diverse
offerings.
David Chalmers offers that “the most important views on the meta-
physics of consciousness can be divided almost exhaustively into six
classes,” which he labels “type A” through “type F.” The first three (A
through C) involve broadly reductive views, seeing consciousness as a
physical process that involves no expansion of a physical ontology
[Materialism Theories, 9]. The other three (D through F) involve broadly
nonreductive views, on which consciousness involves something irre-
ducible in nature, and requires expansion or reconception of a physical
ontology [D = Dualism, 15; E = Epiphenomenalism, 9.1.2; F = Monism,
14] (Chalmers, 2003).
PhilPapers (David Bourget and David Chalmers, general editors)
feature hundreds of papers on Theories of Consciousness, organized into
six categories: Representationalism; Higher-Order Theories of Con-
sciousness; Functionalist Theories of Consciousness; Biological Theories
of
Consciousness;
Panpsychism;
Miscellaneous
Theories
of
Consciousness (including Eliminativism, Illusionism, Monisms, Dualism,
Idealism) (Bourget and Chalmers, PhilPapers). In presenting a case for
panpsychism, Chalmers arrays and assesses materialism, dualism and
monism as well as panpsychism (Chalmers, 2016a).
Neuroscientist Anil Seth and Tim Bayne gather and summarize a
wide range of candidate theories of consciousness seeking to explain the
biological and physical basis of consciousness (22 theories that are
essentially neurobiological) (Seth and Bayne, 2022). They review four
prominent theories—higher-order theories; global workspace theories;
reentry and predictive processing theories; and integrated information
theory—and they assert that “the iterative development, testing and
comparison of theories of consciousness will lead to a deeper under-
standing of this most central of mysteries.” However, Seth and Bayne
intensify the mystery by observing, “Notably, instead of ToCs [theories
of consciousness] progressively being ‘ruled out’ as empirical data ac-
cumulates, they seem to be proliferating.” This seems telling.
An engagingly novel kind of survey of the mind-body problem is an
insightful (and delightfully idiosyncratic) book by science writer John
Horgan (2018). Rejecting “hard-core materialists” who insist “it is a
pseudo-problem, which vanishes once you jettison archaic concepts like
‘the self’ and ‘free will’,” Horgan states that “the mind-body problem is
quite real, simple and urgent. You face it whenever you wonder who you
really are.” Recognizing that we can’t escape our subjectivity when we
try to solve the riddle of ourselves, he explores his thesis by delving into
the professional and personal lives of nine mind-body experts. (He ad-
mits it is odd to offer “my subjective takes on my subjects’ subjective
takes on subjectivity.”) (Horgan, 2019).
While greater understanding of the biological (and material) basis of
consciousness will no doubt be achieved, the deeper question is whether
such biological understanding will be sufficient to explain, even in
principle, the essence of consciousness, ever. While most adherents at
both ends of the Landscape of Consciousness—materialists and ideal-
ists—are confident of the ultimate vindication of their positions, others,
including me, take this deeper question as remaining an open question.
My high-bar attempt here is to generate a landscape that is univer-
sally exhaustive, in that whatever the ultimate explanation of con-
sciousness, it is somewhere, somehow, embedded in this Landscape of
theories (perhaps in multiple places)—even if we have no way, now or in
the foreseeable future, to discern it from its cohort Landscapees.
5. Opposing worldviews
At the highest level of abstraction, there are two ways to frame
competing theories of consciousness. One way pits monism, where only
one kind of stuff is fundamental (though manifest in ostensibly different
forms), against dualism, where both physical and mental realms are
equally fundamental, without either being reducible to the other.11
There are two kinds of monism, each sitting at opposite ends of the
Landscape of Consciousness: at one end, materialism or physicalism,12
where the only real things are products of, or subject to, the laws of
physics, and can be accessed reliably and reproducibly only by the
natural sciences; and at the other end, idealism, where only the mental is
11 Logically, there is no necessity for dualism to be the limit; there can be
innumerable kinds of irreducible “World-Stuffs”; for this Landscape, monism vs.
dualism is sufficiently daunting.
12 “Materialism” and “physicalism” are roughly equivalent ontological terms,
often used interchangeably, although physicalism can cover wider territory,
including properties that the laws of physics describe, e.g., space, time, energy,
matter. Moreover, physicalism can connote more epistemological matters, in
terms of how we can know things. Materialism can be distinguished as the more
restrictive term, meaning all that is real is matter and its equivalents. It con-
notes more ontological concerns, in terms of what really exists. In this Land-
scape, we go more with “materialism,” which also maintains historical
continuity.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
33
fundamental, and all else, including all physical existence, is derivative,
a manifestation of the mental. (Nondualism, from philosophical and
religious traditions originating on the Indian subcontinent, avers that
consciousness and only consciousness, which is cosmic, is fundamental
and primitive. 16.1.)
The second way to frame opposing explanations of consciousness is
simply the classic physical vs. nonphysical distinction, though certain
explanations, such as panpsychism, may blur the boundary.
6. Is consciousness primitive/fundamental?
A first foundational question is whether consciousness is primitive or
fundamental, meaning that it cannot be totally explained by, or
“reduced” to, a deeper level of reality. (“Totally” is the operative word,
because consciousness can be explained by, or reduced to, neuroscience,
biology, chemistry and physics, certainly in large part, at least.)
If consciousness is primitive or fundamental, we can try to explore
what this means, what alternative concepts of ultimate reality may
follow—though, if this were the case, there is probably not much
progress to be made.
On the other hand, if consciousness is not primitive or fundamental,
there is much further work to be done and progress to be made. To begin,
there are (at least) three next questions:
First, is consciousness “real,” or, on the other hand, is it sufficiently
an “illusion,” a brain trick, as it were, which would render consternation
over the conundrum moot, if not meaningless?
Second, if consciousness is real (and not primitive), then since in
some sense it would be emergent, would this emergence of conscious-
ness be “weak,” meaning that in principle it could be explained by, or
reduced to, more fundamental science (even if in practice, it could not
be, for a long time, if ever)?
Third, if weak emergence has insufficient resources, would this
emergence of consciousness be “strong,” meaning that it would be
forever impossible to totally explain consciousness, even in principle, by
reducing it to more fundamental levels of scientific explanation (9.1.4).
Finally, is there an intermediate position, where consciousness was
not fundamental ab initio, but when it evolved or emerged, conscious-
ness came to become somehow inevitable, more than an accidental
byproduct of physical processes? Some see in the grand evolution of the
cosmos a process where elements in the cosmos—or more radically, the
cosmos itself—work to make the cosmos increasingly self-aware (13.8).
Some founders of quantum theory famously held consciousness as
fundamental. Max Planck: “I regard consciousness as fundamental. I
regard matter as derivative from consciousness. We cannot get behind
consciousness. Everything that we talk about, everything that we regard
as existing, postulates consciousness” (The Observer, 1931a). Erwin
Schr¨odinger: “Although I think that life may be the result of an accident,
I do not think that of consciousness. Consciousness cannot be accounted
for in physical terms. For consciousness is absolutely fundamental. It
cannot be accounted for in terms of anything else” (The Observer,
1931b). Also, “The total number of minds in the universe is one. In fact,
consciousness is a singularity phasing within all beings.” Arthur
Eddington: “when we speak of the existence of the material universe we
are presupposing consciousness.” (The Observer, 1931c). Louis de Bro-
glie: “I regard consciousness and matter as different aspects of one and
the same thing” (The Observer, 1931d). John von Neumann (less
explicitly): "Consciousness, whatever it is, appears to be the only thing in
physics that can ultimately cause this collapse or observation." John
Stewart Bell: “As regards mind, I am fully convinced that it has a central
place in the ultimate nature of reality” (Mollan, 2007).
Of course, consciousness as fundamental would eliminate only
Materialism Theories. Compatible would be Panpsychisms, Monisms,
Dualisms and Idealisms; also, some Quantum Theories and perhaps In-
tegrated Information Theory. (But Materialism has substantial re-
sources, 9.)
7. Identity theory
I take special interest in identity theory (Smart, 2007), not because I
subscribe to the early mind-brain identity theory as originally formu-
lated, but because its way of thinking is far more pervasive and far more
elucidating than often realized (though perhaps in a way not as sanguine
as some may have hoped).
In PhilPapers’ Theories of Consciousness, Mind-Brain Identity The-
ory is classified under Biological Theories of Consciousness. Classic
mind-brain identity theory is indeed the commitment that mental states/
events/processes are identical to brain states/events/processes (Ara-
nyosi, PhilPapers).
I would want to generalize this. I would want to say that any theory
of consciousness, to be complete and sufficient, must make an identity
claim. Bottom line, every theory of consciousness that offers itself as a
total explanation, necessary if not always sufficient—other than those
where consciousness is fundamental—must be a kind of identity theory.
I mean identity theory in the strong sense, in the same sense that the
Morning Star and the Evening Star must both be Venus, such that if you
eliminate the Morning Star you cannot have the Evening Star. (David
Papineau makes a virtue of this necessity in his mind-brain identity
argument for physicalism. It doesn’t matter which specific materialist or
physicalist theory—all of them, in essence, are mind-brain identity
theories [Papineau, 2020b]—9.1.9.)
Here’s the point. There is some kind of “consciousness identity”
actually happening—it is always happening and it never changes.
Something happening or existing in every sentient creature just is
consciousness.
8. A landscape
As the title suggests, the purpose of this paper is to work toward
developing a landscape of consciousness, a taxonomy of explanations
and implications. The focus is ontological: what is the essence of our
inner awareness of felt experience, our perceiving, our enjoying, what
we call qualia.
To get an overall sense of the entire Landscape, I have three Figures:
Fig. 1: A high-level list of the 10 major categories, and under Mate-
rialism Theories, the 10 subcategories.
Fig. 2: A complete list of all the theories of consciousness, organized
under the major categories and subcategories.
Fig. 3: A graphic image of the entire Landscape, with all categories,
subcategories and theories (abbreviated) (created by Alex Gomez-
Marin).
Note: Categories 1–10 in the Figures correspond to sections 9-18 in
the text. To convert from categories/theories in the Figures to sec-
tions/theories in the text, add eight (+8). Conversely, to convert
from sections/theories in the text to categories/theories in the Fig-
ures, subtract eight (−8).
I distinguish what consciousness is ontologically from how con-
sciousness happens operationally. The Landscape I present is populated
primarily by claims of what consciousness actually is, not how it func-
tions and not how it evolved over deep time (although both how it
functions and how it evolved may well reflect what it is). This is not a
landscape of how consciousness emerged or its purpose or its con-
tent—sensations, perceptions, cognitions, emotions, language—none of
these—although all of these are recruited by various explanations on
offer.
Mechanisms of consciousness are relevant here only to the extent
that they elucidate a core theory of consciousness. For example, the
“neurogeographic” debate between the “front of the head” folks—the
Global Workspace (9.2.3) and Higher-Order (9.8.3) theorists—and the
“back of the head” folks—the Integrated Information (4) and Recurrent
Processing (9.8.2) theorists—is essential for a complete neurobiological
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
34
explanation of consciousness (Block, 2023, pp. 417–418), but it is of
only mild interest for an ontological survey of the Landscape. If the
Global Workplace suddenly shifted to the back of the head, and Inte-
grated Information to the front, would the “trading-places” inversion
make much ontological difference?
Traditionally and simplistically, the clash is between materialism/
physicalism and dualism or idealism; such oversimplification may be
part of the problem—other categories and subcategories have standing.
The alternative theories of consciousness that follow come about via
my hundreds of conversations and decades of readings and night-
musings. I array 10 categories of explanations or theories of con-
sciousness; all but one present multiple specific theories; only Materi-
alism has subcategories. (There are many ways to envision a landscape,
of course, and, as a result, many ways to array theories. I claim no
privileged view.)
Here are the 10 primary categories of explanations or theories:
Materialism Theories (with many subcategories); Non-Reductive Phys-
icalism; Quantum Theories; Integrated Information Theory; Panpsy-
chisms; Monisms; Dualisms; Idealisms; Anomalous and Altered States
Theories; Challenge Theories.
It is no surprise that Materialism Theories have by far the largest
number of specific theories. It is the only category with a three-level
organization: there are 10 subcategories under Materialism, each
housing seven to 14 specific theories. This makes sense in that there are
more ways to explain consciousness with neurobiological and other
physical models than with non-neurobiological and non-physical
models, and also in that the challenge for materialism is to account for
how the physical brain entails mental states (and there are increasingly
innovative and diverse claims to do so).
There is obvious overlap among categories and among theories
within categories, and it is often challenging to pick distinguishing traits
to classify theories in such a one-dimensional, artificial and imposed
typology. For example, one can well argue that Non-Reductive Physi-
calism, Quantum Theories, and perhaps even Integrated Information
Theory and Panpsychisms, are all, in essence, Materialism Theories, in
that they do not require anything beyond the physical world (whether in
current or extended form). I break out these categories because, in
recent times, each has developed a certain independence, prominence
and credibility (at least in the sense of the credulity of adherents), and
because they differ sufficiently from classic Materialism Theories,
exemplified by neurobiological mechanisms.
In addition, the ideas of epiphenomenalism, functionalism and
emergence, and the mechanisms of prediction and language models,
while themselves not specific explanations of consciousness, represent
core concepts in philosophy of mind that can affect some explanations
and influence some implications.
Some would impose an “entrance requirement” on the Landscape,
such that theories admitted need be “scientific” in the sense that the
scientific method should be applicable, whether in a formal Popperian
falsification sense or with a weaker verification methodology. I do not
Fig. 1. A landscape of consciousness - basic outline.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
35
subscribe to this limitation, although we must always distinguish be-
tween science and philosophy, along with other potential forms of
knowledge. (My quasi-“Overton Window” of consciousness—the range
of explanatory theories I feel comfortable presenting, if not pro-
pounding—may be wider than those of others, whether physicalists or
nonphysicalists13 [Birth, 2023]. One reason for my wider window is the
unsolicited theories of consciousness I receive on Closer To Truth, some
of which I find intriguing if not convincing.)
The Landscape itself, as a one-dimensional typology, is limited and
imperfect decisions must be made: which theories to include and which
not; where to classify; what is the optimal order; whether to append a
possessive name to the theory’s title; and the like. I’ve tried to include all
the well-known theories and an idiosyncratic selection of lesser-known
theories that have some aspects of originality, rationality, coherence,
and, well, charm. In addition, a few theories reflect the beliefs of com-
mon people, or the interests of Closer To Truth viewers, though largely
dismissed by the scientific and philosophical communities. Some the-
ories some think bizarre, “fabulous” in the original meaning of the word:
“mythical, celebrated in fable.” All reflect the imaginations of the human
mind driven by a quest to know reality. Please do not take the un-
avoidable appearance of visual equality among theories as indicating
their truth-value equivalence (or, for that matter, my personal opinion of
them).
Neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux (9.8.5; 9.10.2), noting “the broad
nature” of the Landscape (on reviewing an early draft), suggests that
“The Sniff Test” might be relevant. (He uses The Sniff Test to assess the
strong AI view substituting “consciousness” for “intelligence” [LeDoux,
2023a, p. 301.]) I’m all for imposing an olfactory hurdle for theories of
Fig. 2. A landscape of consciousness - complete outline.
13 “In politics, the ‘Overton window‘ is the range of positions that politicians
can safely raise in public discourse. Propose something outside the window and
you can expect resistance—not just to the proposal itself, but to the idea that,
after saying what you just said, you even merit a place in the debate. Science
too has Overton windows. Sometimes positions can be so far outside the
mainstream that they invite the charge that we should not even be discussing this”
(Birth, 2023).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
36
consciousness (recognizing that olfactory bulbs do differ).
Readers may well have corrections and additions, which I welcome.
The Landscape is a work-in-process and I look forward to feedback so it
can be extended and improved.
Once again, the rough flow of the theories arraying the Landscape of
Consciousness—as per my idiosyncratic approach—is on a rough, arbi-
trarily linear, physicalism-nonphysicalism spectrum from, to begin with,
most physical, and to end with, most nonphysical (or least physical)
(Figs. 1–3).
9. Materialism theories
Materialism is the claim that consciousness is entirely physical,
solely the product of biological brains, and all mental states can be fully
“reduced” to, or wholly explained by, physical states—which, at their
deepest levels, are the fields and particles of fundamental physics. In
short, materialism, in its many forms and flavors, gives a completely
physicalist account of phenomenal consciousness.
Overwhelmingly for scientists, materialism is the prevailing theory
of consciousness. To them, the utter physicality of consciousness is an
assumed premise, supported strongly by incontrovertible empirical ev-
idence from neuroscience (e.g., brain impairment, brain stimulation).
This is “Biological Naturalism,” as exemplified by philosopher John
Fig. 2. (continued).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
37
Searle (Searle, 2007a, 2007b). It is a view, to a first approximation, that
promises, if not yet offers, a complete solution to Chalmers’s hard
problem.14
To neuroscientist Susan Greenfield, the nonmaterialist view that
consciousness might be irreducible is “‘a get-out-of-jail-for-free card’,
that is to say, whatever I did, whatever I showed you, whatever exper-
iments I did, whatever theories I had in brain terms, you could always
say ‘consciousness has the extra thing,’ and this extra thing is the thing
that really counts and is something that we brain scientists can’t touch.”
She adds, “If reduction is a ‘dirty word,’ we can say explicable, inter-
pretable, or understandable,” but explaining consciousness must be al-
ways and solely in brain and body terms (Greenfield, 2012).
Compared to some of the consciousness-as-primary theories that
follow, Materialism Theories can be counted as deflationary (which
doesn’t make them wrong, of course, or even unexciting). To physicist
Sean Carroll, consciousness is “a way of talking about the physical world,
just like many other ways of talking. It’s one of these emergent phe-
nomena that we find is a useful way of packaging reality, so we say that
someone is conscious of something that corresponds to certain physical
actions in the real world.” Carroll is unambiguous: “I don’t think that
there is anything special about mental properties. I don’t think there’s any
special mental realm of existence. I think it’s all the physical world and all
the manifold ways we have of describing it” (Carroll, 2016).
Fig. 2. (continued).
14 In producing and hosting Closer To Truth over the years, I have interviewed
David Chalmers and John Searle multiple times. One of my favorite Closer To
Truth TV episodes is a retrospective of three interviews I did with Dave and
John over a period of 15 years: 1999, when Dave and John were together on the
same panel during the first season of Closer To Truth (roundtable format); 2007
(some months apart); and 2014, both at the 20th anniversary of the “Toward a
Science of Consciousness” Conference in Tucson, Arizona (Chalmers and Searle,
2014).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
38
Nobel laureate biologist Gerald Edelman agrees. He does not
consider the real existence of qualia to be an insurmountable impedi-
ment to a thoroughly materialistic theory of consciousness. “To expect
that a theoretical explanation of consciousness can itself provide an
observer with the experience of ‘the redness of red’ is to ignore just those
phenotypic properties and life history that enable an individual animal
to know what it is like to be such an animal. A scientific theory cannot
presume to replicate the experience that it describes or explains; a the-
ory to account for a hurricane is not a hurricane. A third-person
description by a theorist of the qualia associated with wine tasting
can, for example, take detailed account of the reported personal expe-
riences of that theorist and his human subjects. It cannot, however,
directly convey or induce qualia by description; to experience the dis-
criminations of an individual, it is necessary to be that individual”
(Edelman, 2003). While Edelman’s honest assessment may give Mate-
rialism Theories their best shot, many remain unpersuaded. After all,
still, we wonder: what are qualia? Literally, what are they!
Even among philosophers, a majority are physicalists (but just
barely). In their 2020 survey of professional philosophers, Bourget and
Chalmers report 51.9% support Physicalism; 32.1%, Non-physicalism;
and 15.9%, Other (Bourget and Chalmers, 2023; Bourget and Chalm-
ers, 2014).
Chalmers provides “roughly three ways that a materialist might
resist the epistemic arguments” by mitigating the epistemic gap between
the physical and phenomenal domains, where “each denies a certain sort
of close epistemic relation between the domains: a relation involving
what we can know, or conceive, or explain.” According to Chalmers, “A
type-A materialist denies that there is the relevant sort of epistemic gap.
A type-B materialist accepts that there is an unclosable epistemic gap,
but denies that there is an ontological gap. And a type-C materialist
accepts that there is a deep epistemic gap, but holds that it will even-
tually be closed” (Chalmers, 2003).
Fig. 2. (continued).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
39
A subtle way to think about Materialism Theories recruits the
concept of “supervenience” in that “the mental supervenes on the
physical” such that there cannot be a change in the mental without there
being a change in the physical. One such subtlety is the modal force of
the connection or dependency, parsing among logical necessity, meta-
physical necessity, factual or empirical necessity, as well as among
explanation, entailment, grounding, reduction, emergence, ontological
dependence, and the like. For this Landscape of explanations of con-
sciousness, we leave “supervenience” to others (McLaughlin and Ben-
nett, 2021).
Similarly, the relationship between introspection and consciousness
is an intimate one, linking the epistemology of self-knowledge with the
metaphysics of mind. For several theories of consciousness, introspec-
tion is essential (e.g., neurophenomenology, 9.6.4 and 9.6.5), though for
most, it is a non-issue (Smithies and Stoljar, 2012).
Two major theories of consciousness are Integrated Information
Theory and Global Workspace Theory. Both are important, of course,
and perhaps by situating them on the Landscape, they can be evaluated
from different perspectives. In what may reflect my personal bias, I
situate Global Workspace Theory under Materialism’s Neurobiological
Theories, while giving Integrated Information Theory its own first-order
category. (This reflects my sense of the nature of their mechanisms, not
my opinion of the truth of their claims.)
I group Materialism Theories into ten subcategories: Philosophical
Theories, Neurobiological Theories, Electromagnetic Field Theories,
Computational and Informational Theories, Homeostatic and Affective
Theories, Embodied and Enactive Theories, Relational Theories,
Representational Theories, Language Relationships, and Phylogenetic
Evolution.
While many of the following theories under Materialism Theories
proffer to explain what happens in consciousness, or what causes con-
sciousness, in that they describe alternative critical processes in gener-
ating consciousness, the question always remains, are they even
acknowledging, much less addressing, the question of what
Fig. 2. (continued).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
40
consciousness actually is?
In picking out multiple materialist theories and principles, many
overlap or nest, obviously, but by presenting them separately, I try to
tease out emphasis and nuance. The list cannot be exhaustive.
9.1. Philosophical Theories
Philosophical theories combine relevant fundamental principles for
theories of consciousness with framing of the mind-body problem and
philosophical defenses of Materialism.
9.1.1. Eliminative materialism/illusionism
Eliminative Materialism is the maximalist physicalist position that
our common-sense view of the mind is misleading and that conscious-
ness is in a kind of illusion generated by the brain—a contingent,
evolutionary, inner adaptation that enhanced fitness and reproductive
success. This deflationary view of consciousness is associated with phi-
losophers Patricia Churchland (1986), Paul Churchland (1981), Daniel
Dennett (1992), Keith Frankish (2022), and others, though their views
are often distorted and caricatured.
Paul Churchland defines “eliminative materialism” forcefully as “the
thesis that our common-sense conception of psychological phenomena
constitutes a radically false theory, a theory so fundamentally defective
that both the principles and the ontology of that theory will eventually
be displaced, rather than smoothly reduced, by completed neurosci-
ence.” Our third-person understanding and even our first-person intro-
spection, Churchland says, “may then be reconstituted within the
conceptual framework of completed neuroscience, a theory we may
expect to be more powerful by far than the common-sense psychology it
displaces” He applauds “the principled displacement of folk psychology
… [as] one of the most intriguing theoretical displacements we can
currently imagine” (Churchland, 1981).
Patricia Churchland’s path-setting 1986 book, Neurophilosophy,
places the mind-body problem within the wider context of the philoso-
phy of science and argues for a complete reductionist account of con-
sciousness founded on neurobiology (Churchland, 1986). Indeed,
“neurophilosophy" is the proffered name of a new discipline that is to be
guided by Churchland’s “unified theory of the mind-brain,” for which
her "guiding aim” is to develop “a very general framework” (Stent,
1987). She founds her approach on two principles: the progress of
neuroscience in addressing mental states, and the recognition by many
philosophers that philosophy is no longer “an a priori discipline in which
philosophers can discover the a priori principles that neuroscientific
theories had better honor on peril of being found wrong.”
That there remain philosophers who persist in arguing that the mind
goes beyond the brain—they reject reductionism “as unlikely—and not
merely unlikely, but as flatly preposterous"—Churchland attributes to
persistent traditions of folk myths. To discover our true nature, she
implores, “we must see ourselves as organisms in Nature, to be under-
stood by scientific methods and means” (Churchland, 1986). She rejects
the anti-reductionist weapon of “emergence” as being “of little explan-
atory value” (Stent, 1987).
Dennett argues that qualia—the qualitive features of phenomenal
consciousness—which he notes (with a smile) compel philosophers to
develop outlandish theories, are illusory and incoherent (9.4). To
neuroscientist Michael Graziano, it’s not that consciousness doesn’t
exist or that we are fooled into thinking we have it when we don’t.
Instead, eliminative materialism likens consciousness to the illusion
created for the user of a human-computer interface such that the
Fig. 3. A landscape of consciousness.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
41
metaphysical properties we attribute to ourselves are wrong15 (Gra-
ziano, 2014, 2019a, 2019c).
In spite of the word “illusion” (see below). its proponents do not
actually deny the reality of the things that compose what Wilfrid Sellars
famously called “the manifest image”—thoughts, intentions, appear-
ances, experiences—which he distinguished from “the scientific image”
(Sellars, 1962). The things we see and hear and interact with are, ac-
cording to Dennett, “not mere fictions but different versions of what
actually exists: real patterns” (Dennett, 2017). The underlying reality,
however—what exists in itself and not just apparently for us or for other
creatures—is truly represented only by the scientific image, which must
be expressed ultimately in the language of physics, chemistry, molecular
biology, and neurophysiology.
Picking up on analogies in Dennett’s work, as he puts it, Keith
Frankish proposed the term “illusionism,” which has been adopted for
the view that consciousness does not involve awareness of special
“phenomenal” properties and that belief in such properties is due to an
introspective illusion. Frankish concludes: “Considered as a set of
functional processes—a hugely complex informational and reactive
engagement with the world—it is perfectly real. Considered as an in-
ternal realm of phenomenal properties or what-it-is-likenesses, it is
illusory” (Frankish, 2022).
Although what we see and hear, for all the world, seems precisely
what really exists, ringing in our ears and stars in our eyes undermine
our realist folk psychology. (Personally, I have my own unambiguous
proof. With my normal left eye, I see a light bulb as a single point of
light; with my right eye, afflicted with advanced keratoconus, I see about
100 points of skewed, smeared light.)
Another approach claiming that there is no phenomenal conscious-
ness draws on arguments from Buddhist philosophy of mind to show that
the sense that there is this kind of consciousness is an instance of
cognitive illusion. As articulated by Jay Garfield, “there is nothing ’that
it is like’ to be me. To believe in phenomenal consciousness or ’what-it’s-
like-ness’ or ’for-me-ness’ is to succumb to a pernicious form of the Myth
of the Given.” He argues that “there are no good arguments for the ex-
istence of such a kind of consciousness” (Garfield, 2016).
The fact that some deny the existence of experience, says philosopher
Galen Strawson, should make us “feel very sober, and a little afraid, at
the power of human credulity.” This particular denial, he says with
flourish, “is the strangest thing that has ever happened in the whole
history of human thought, not just the whole history of philosophy”
(Strawson, 2009).
While dismissing eliminative materialism and illusionism might at
first seem obviously right, a prima facie case, I’d not so quickly jump to
that conclusion: it could self-limit the awareness of subtleties and the
nature of boundaries in the hunt for consciousness.
9.1.2. Epiphenomenalism
In epiphenomenalism, consciousness is entirely physical, solely the
product of biological brains, but mental states cannot be entirely
reduced to physical states (brains or otherwise), and mental states have
no causal powers. Constrained by the “causal closure of the physical,”
the mind, whatever else it might be, is entirely inert: our awareness of
consciousness is real, but our sense of mental causation is not. Con-
sciousness is still a kind of illusion or trick in that there is no “top-down
causation”; our sense that our thoughts can cause things is mistaken. In
this manner, epiphenomenalism is a weaker form of non-reductive
physicalism (10). All conscious mental events, including conscious
perceptions, involve unconscious processing. The classic analogy for
consciousness as an epiphenomenon is “foam on an ocean wave:” always
there, apparently active, but never really doing anything.
More formally, epiphenomenalism holds that phenomenal properties
are ontologically distinct from physical properties, and that the
phenomenal has no effect on the physical. Physical states cause
phenomenal states, but not vice versa. The arrow of psychophysical
causation points in only one direction, from physical to phenomenal
(Chalmers, 2003). This makes epiphenomenalism a weak form of
Dualism (15), but by affirming the complete causal closure of the
physical, it well deserves its spot in Materialism Theories.
Apparent support for consciousness epiphenomenalism comes from
the famous Libet experiment, which demonstrated that brain activity
associated with a voluntary movement (“readiness potential”) precedes
conscious experience of the intention to make that movement by several
hundred milliseconds (Frith and Haggard, 2018). The implication is that
the brain, rather than conscious “free will”, initiates voluntary acts.
Studied extensively, the Libet readiness potential data are reproducible
and robust under diverse experiment designs. However, its theoretical
and methodological foundations have been challenged (Gholipour,
2019), particularly with respect to stochastic noise in brain, the spon-
taneous fluctuations in neuronal activity (Schurger et al., 2012).
Epiphenomenalism highlights the need to recognize that the search
for a metaphysical theory of consciousness must integrate a theory of
mental causation, which in turn must deal with the epistemic problem of
self-knowledge. In epiphenomenalism, the integration is obvious
because the lack of mental causation is its primary feature. In other
theories of consciousness, mental causation will be less obvious but
perhaps no less important.
Daniel Stoljar notes that if phenomenal consciousness would be
“merely an epiphenomenon with no causal force,” perhaps “this will end
up being the best option for dualism 2.0 (15.10), despite its being
counterintuitive—after all, it certainly seems to us that our phenome-
nally conscious states causally matter. But any view on the problem of
consciousness is likely going to have to embrace some counterintuitive
result at some point” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. 55).
Parallelism, a similar but less popular theory than epiphenome-
nalism, holds that physical events entirely cause physical events and
mental events entirely cause mental events, but there is no causal
connection between physical and mental worlds in either direction. But
if no connection, what would maintain such perfect correspondences? It
is no challenge to discern why parallelism is less popular.
9.1.3. Functionalism
Functionalism in philosophy of mind is the theory that functions are
dispositive—activities, roles, results, outputs—mediums are not. What’s
critical is how mental states work, not in what substrates mental states are
found (Levin, 2023). Mental states are not dependent on their internal
constitutions, what they are, but rather only on their outputs or roles, what
they do. As long as the functions (activities) are conducive to creating
consciousness, it does not matter whether the substrates are neural tissue
or computer chips or any form of matter that can instantiate information.
Ned Block defines functionalism as the theory that “mental states are
constituted by their causal relations to one another and to sensory inputs
and behavioral outputs.” Functionalism can be appreciated, he says, by
attending to “artifact concepts like carburetor and biological concepts
like kidney. What it is for something to be a carburetor is for it to mix fuel
and air in an internal combustion engine—carburetor is a functional
concept. In the case of the kidney, the scientific concept is functio-
nal—defined in terms of a role in filtering the blood and maintaining
certain chemical balances” (Block, 1980; Block, 2007b).
Block gives the functionalist answer to the perennial question, “What
are mental states?”, stating simply that “mental states are functional
states.” The significance of this simple identity is precisely this simple
identity. Thus, he says, “theses of metaphysical functionalism are some-
times described as functional state identity theses” (Block, 1980; Block,
2007b).
15 Ironically, Donald Hoffman appeals to the same analogy of a human-
computer user interface to argue for the view diametrically opposite to that
of Dennett and Graziano. Hoffman argues for Idealism, that not only is con-
sciousness real, it is the only thing that is real fundamentally (Idealism, 16;
Hoffman, 16.5).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
42
Block explores the relationship between functionalism and reductive
physicalism. “The first step in a reductive physicalist enterprise,” he
says, “is to functionally characterize the property to be reduced and the
second step is to find the physical property that fills the functional role.
Reductive physicalism is true for the mind if both steps can always be
carried out.” Block makes the at-first counterintuitive claim that
reductive physicalism and functionalism are “incompatible rivals,”
explaining that when understood as metaphysical theses, “appearances
to the contrary stem from failure to sufficiently appreciate the upshot of
the difference between metaphysics and ontology”—in that function-
alism is agnostic on the existence of nonphysical substances (Block,
2008).
David Chalmers uses a silicon-chip-replacement thought experiment
to support a functional approach to consciousness.16 “When experience
arises from a physical system,” he says, “it does so in virtue of the sys-
tem’s functional organization.” The thought experiment replaces brain
neurons with microchips that can duplicate 100% of the neuron’s
functions, and to do so slowly, even one by one. (That such technology is
fiendishly complex is irrelevant.) The question is, what happens to one’s
conscious experience, one’s qualia? Would it gradually wink or fade
out? Chalmers says no: the conscious experience, the qualia, would not
change—there would be no difference at all. This result would support
Chalmers’s “principle of organizational invariance, holding that experi-
ence is invariant across systems with the same fine-grained functional
organization” (Chalmers, 1995a). Not everyone agrees, of course (Block,
2023; Van Heuveln et al., 1998).
Computational functionalism goes further and commits to the thesis
that performing computations of a particular, natural and likely
discoverable kind is both necessary and sufficient for consciousness in
general and ultimately for human-level consciousness (and perhaps for
speculative higher forms of consciousness). Whether consciousness is
indeed computational elicits probative and profound debate (e.g., Pen-
rose, 1999; 1996).
Functionalism with respect to consciousness is more an overarching
principle, a way of thinking, than a proffered model, a claimed expla-
nation on its own. Functionalism can apply in many Materialist Theories
and it is often assumed as an a priori premise. Functionalism is the
theoretical foundation of “virtual immortality,” the theory that the
fullness of our mental selves can be uploaded with first-person perfec-
tion to non-biological media, so that when our mortal bodies die our
mental selves will live on (Kuhn, 2016a). (See Virtual Immortality.)
9.1.4. Emergence
Emergence is the claim that qualitatively new, even radically novel
properties in biological systems and psychological states arise from
physical properties governed entirely by the laws of physics. The re-
emergence of emergence in the sciences, where whole entities are, or
seem to be, more than the sum of all their parts, has been controversial,
its assessment ranging from trivial and distracting to radical and revo-
lutionary (Clayton and Davies, 2008). Emergence in the study of con-
sciousness is especially foundational, more as a basic principle
undergirding and enhancing various theories than as a specific theory in
its own right.
Emergence, according to Paul Davies, means that “at each level of
complexity, new and often surprising qualities emerge that cannot, at
least in any straightforward manner, be attributed to known properties
of the constituents. ln some cases, the emergent quality simply makes no
sense when applied to the parts. Thus water may be described as wet, but
it would be meaningless to ask whether a molecule of H2O is wet”
(Davies, 2008). Moreover, it could seem astonishing that the properties
of two common gases, hydrogen and oxygen, can combine to form a
liquid that is wet and a solid that expands when cooled. Yet, physics and
physical chemistry can explain all of this, in terms of atomic structures
and bonding angles.
Emergence can be appreciated in contrast with its mortal conceptual
rival: reductionism. Reductionism is mainstream science, the bedrock
assumption of the scientific method: All, in principle, can be explained
by physics, even if all, in practice, cannot be.
Davies defines “ontological reductionism” as the state of affairs
where all reality “is, in the final analysis, nothing but the sum of the
parts, and that the formulation of concepts, theories, and experimental
procedures in terms of higher-level concepts is merely a convenience.”
(He distinguishes “methodological reductionism,” where reductionism
is a “fruitful methodology,” from “epistemological reductionism” where
all we can know is that reductionism works by explaining one scientific
level in terms of lower or more fundamental levels, without making any
claim on ultimate reality.) (Davies, 2008).
But “for emergence to be accepted as more than a methodological
convenience—that is, for emergence to make a difference in our un-
derstanding of how the world works,” Davies argues that “something has
to give within existing theory.” Davies himself has been a leader in “a
growing band of scientists who are pushing at the straitjacket of or-
thodox causation to ’make room’ for strong emergence (see below), and
although physics remains deeply reductionistic, there is a sense that the
subject is poised for a dramatic paradigm shift in this regard” (Davies,
2008).
To make sense of emergence, we distinguish between its “weak” and
“strong” forms. In its weak form, while it may not be apparent how the
properties of one level can be entirely explained by the properties of a
lower, more fundamental level, in principle, they can be explained, and
ultimately, science will advance to explain them.
In its strong form, properties at one level can never be explained in
terms of properties of lower levels, not even in principle, no matter how
ultimate the science. As Davies explains, “Strong emergence is a far more
contentious position, in which it is asserted that the micro-level prin-
ciples are quite simply inadequate to account for the system’s behaviour
as a whole. Strong emergence cannot succeed in systems that are caus-
ally closed at the microscopic level, because there is no room for addi-
tional principles to operate that are not already implicit in the lower-
level rules.” He posits only three “loopholes”: the universe is an open
system, non-deterministic quantum mechanics, and computational
imprecision at fundamental levels—all three have obvious problems,
which is why they are “considered unorthodox departures from standard
physical theory” (Davies, 2008).
David Chalmers says that “a high-level phenomenon is strongly
emergent with respect to a low-level domain when the high-level phe-
nomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths concerning that
phenomenon are not deducible even in principle from truths in the low-
level domain.” He distinguishes a high-level phenomenon that is “weakly
emergent with respect to a low-level domain when the high-level phe-
nomenon arises from the low-level domain, but truths concerning that
phenomenon are unexpected given the principles governing the low-
level domain” (Chalmers, 2008).
Strong emergence, Chalmers contends, has “radical consequences,”
such that “If there are phenomena that are strongly emergent with
respect to the domain of physics, then our conception of nature needs to
be expanded to accommodate them. That is, if there are phenomena
whose existence is not deducible from the facts about the exact distri-
bution of particles and fields throughout space and time (along with
other laws of physics), then this suggests that new fundamental laws of
nature are needed to explain these phenomena” (Chalmers, 2008).
By contrasting strong and weak emergence, Chalmers sets the stage
to enact the grand epic of consciousness. “In a way, the philosophical
morals of strong emergence and weak emergence are diametrically
opposed. Strong emergence, if it exists, can be used to reject the phys-
icalist picture of the world as fundamentally incomplete. By contrast,
weak emergence can be used to support the physicalist picture of the
16 Ned Block says that the example used in the fading qualia argument may
derive from John Haugeland (1980), but that “the best version is that of
Chalmers (1995)” (Block, 2023, p. 451).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
43
world, by showing how all sorts of phenomena that might seem novel
and irreducible at first sight can nevertheless be grounded in underlying
simple laws” (Chalmers, 2008).
Chalmers is not shy: “I think there is exactly one clear case of a
strongly emergent phenomenon, and that is the phenomenon of con-
sciousness.” He suggests that “the lawful connection between physical
processes and consciousness is not itself derivable from the laws of
physics but is instead a further basic law or laws of its own. The laws that
express the connection between physical processes and consciousness
are what we might call fundamental psychophysical laws” (Chalmers,
2008).
The challenge of strong emergence, especially in consciousness, is a
deep probe of not only how the mind works but also how the world
works. Its influence is felt all along the Landscape of Consciousness.
9.1.5. Mind-brain identity theory
As noted, mind-brain identity theory holds that states and processes
of the mind are identical to states and processes of the brain (Smart,
2007) and as such can be considered the exemplar of materialism. Early
on, in the mid-20th century, mind-brain identity theory had been a
leader as an explanation of consciousness, but today, in its original form,
it is no longer a major contender. Though the original identity theory has
evolved in a kind of arms race with critics, it is generally considered
undermined by various objections, the most common being multiple
realizability (Aranyosi, PhilPapers).
9.1.6. Searle’s biological naturalism
“Biological Naturalism” is the name philosopher John Searle gave to
a neurobiological solution to the mind-body problem. His approach is to
ignore the mind-body problem’s philosophical history and focus on
“what you know for a fact.” He starts with a mundane, working defini-
tion of consciousness: “Conscious states are those states of awareness,
sentience or feeling that begin in the morning when we wake from a
dreamless sleep and continue throughout the day until we fall asleep or
otherwise become ‘unconscious’” (Searle, 2007b; Searle, 2014a).
Searle identifies four essential features of consciousness: “1.
Conscious states, so defined, are qualitative, in the sense that there is a
qualitative feel to being in any particular conscious state …. 2. Such
conscious states are also ontologically subjective in the sense that they
only exist as experienced by a human or animal subject …. 3. Further-
more, a striking fact, at any moment in your conscious life, all of your
conscious states are experienced by you as part of a single unified
conscious field …. 4. Most, but not all, conscious states are intentional,
in the philosopher’s sense that they are about, or refer to, objects and
states of affairs.”17
Next is crucial: “The reality and irreducibility of consciousness:
Conscious states, so defined, are real parts of the real world and cannot
be eliminated or reduced to something else.” This means that one cannot
do an ontological reduction of consciousness to more fundamental
neurobiological processes, because, as stated, consciousness has a sub-
jective or a first-person ontology, while the neurobiological causal basis
of consciousness has an objective or third person ontology (Searle,
2007b).
The causal reducibility of consciousness leads to Searle’s major
move: “The neuronal basis of consciousness: All conscious states are
caused by lower-level brain processes.” Not knowing all the details of
exactly how consciousness is caused by brain processes casts “no doubt
that it is in fact.” Searle asserts with confidence, “The thesis that all of
our conscious states, from feeling thirsty to experiencing mystical ec-
stasies, are caused by brain processes is now established by an over-
whelming amount of evidence (Searle, 2007b). (Others, of course,
disagree.)
Finally, Searle’s two-point conclusion: (i) The neuronal realization of
consciousness: All conscious states are realized in the brain as higher
level or system features, and (ii) The causal efficacy of consciousness:
Conscious states, as real parts of the real world, function causally
(Searle, 2007b).
Searle celebrates the fact that his approach to consciousness does not
mention any of the usual-suspect theories, such as dualism, materialism,
epiphenomenalism, or any of the rest of them. He argues that “if you
take seriously the so-called ‘scientific worldview’ and forget about the
history of philosophy,” the views he puts forth are “what you would
come up with.”
Searle explains the name with which he “baptized this view,” Bio-
logical Naturalism. “‘Biological’ because it emphasizes that the right
level to account for the very existence of consciousness is the biological
level … [given] we know that the processes that produce it are neuronal
processes in the brain. ‘Naturalism’ because consciousness is part of the
natural world along with other biological phenomena such as photo-
synthesis, digestion or mitosis, and the explanatory apparatus we need
to explain it we need anyway to explain other parts of nature.”
Searle responds to critics of Biological Naturalism, striking at a key
objection. “Sometimes philosophers talk about naturalizing conscious-
ness and intentionality, but by ‘naturalizing’ they usually mean denying
the first person or subjective ontology of consciousness. On my view,
consciousness does not need naturalizing: It already is part of nature and
it is part of nature as the subjective, qualitative biological part” (Searle,
2007a, 2007b).
9.1.7. Block’s biological reductionism
Philosopher Ned Block represents a majority of philosophers (and a
large majority of scientists) who hold that “phenomenal consciousness is
reducible to its physical basis.” (Block, 2023, p. 445; Block, 2007a). The
best candidates for this reduction, he says, involve neurobiology. “For
example, in the creatures that seem to have consciousness (e.g., pri-
mates, octopi), neurons operate via electrical signals triggering the
release of neurotransmitters, and the neurotransmitters in turn engender
further electrical signals. Neurons operate in a chemical soup, with
direct effects from one neuron to another mediated by chemicals. The
release of chemicals is not confined to the synapse but can also happen in
dendrites” (Block, 2023, p. 446).
These propagating neurophysiological sparks and diffusing neuro-
chemical transmitters compose a magnificently complex and integrated
system that carries and conveys meaning. Block appeals to “this elec-
trochemical nature of known cases of consciousness as an example of a
candidate for neurobiological reduction of consciousness.”
To Block, “the border between seeing and thinking” provides insight
into consciousness and helps adjudicate best theories (Block, 2023). He
highlights this "joint in nature" between perception and cognition and
advocates its study for demystifying the mind. He argues against the-
ories of consciousness that focus on prefrontal cortex, arguing that
perceptual consciousness does not require cognitive processing.
9.1.8. Flanagan’s constructive naturalism
To philosopher Owen Flanagan, “consciousness is neither miraculous
nor terminally mysterious,” and he argues that “it is possible to under-
stand human consciousness in a way that gives its subjective, phenom-
enal aspects their full due, while at the same time taking into account the
neural bases of subjectivity.” The result, he says, “is a powerful synthetic
theory of consciousness, a ‘constructive naturalism,’ according to which
subjective consciousness is real, plays an important causal role, and
resides [without residue] in the brain” (Flanagan, 1993).
The “constructive naturalistic theory” that Flanagan sketches is
“neurophilosophical” in that “it tries to mesh a naturalistic metaphysic
of mind with our still sketchy but maturing understanding of how the
brain works.” It pictures consciousness “as a name for a heterogeneous
set of events and processes that share the property of being experienced.
17 Searle refines his definition: “Consciousness so defined does not imply self-
consciousness …. you do not need a general second-order consciousness to have
a first-order consciousness.” (Searle, 2007b).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
44
Consciousness is taken to name a set of processes, not a thing or a mental
faculty.” The theory is neo-Darwinian, he says, “in that it is committed to
the view that the capacity to experience things evolved via the processes
responsible for the development of our nervous system.” The theory, he
stresses, “denies that consciousness is as consciousness seems at the
surface.” Rather, consciousness has a complex structure, and getting at it
requires “coordination of phenomenological, psychological, and neural
analyses” (Flanagan, 1993).
Flanagan explains that “there is no necessary connection between
how things seem and how they are … [and] we are often mistaken in our
self-reporting, including in our reporting about how things seem.” This
is why he cautions that phenomenology might do “more harm than good
when it comes to developing a proper theory of consciousness, since it
fosters certain illusions about the nature of consciousness” (Flanagan,
1993).
“The most plausible hypothesis,” Flanagan states, “is that the mind is
the brain, a Darwin machine that is a massively well-connected system
of parallel processors interacting with each other from above and below,
and every which way besides.” It is no wonder, he says, that “meaning
holism is true, that we somehow solve the frame problem, and that my
belief that snow is white is realized quite possibly in a somewhat
different way in my brain than the same belief is realized in yours.”
Flanagan addresses “the gap between the first-person way in which
conscious mental life reveals itself and the way it is, or can be described,
from an objective point of view” by asserting bluntly, “mind and brain
are one and the same thing seen from two different perspectives. The gap
between the subjective and the objective is an epistemic gap, not an
ontological gap.” Indeed, he claims, “it is precisely the fact that in-
dividuals possess organismic integrity that explains why subjectivity
accrues first-personally” (Flanagan, 1993).
As a physicalist, Flanagan recognizes the role of emergence, that
“there are emergent natural properties that, despite being obedient to
the laws of physics, are not reducible to physics" (Flanagan, 2003). He
rejects epiphenomenalism, where “conscious thought plays no role in
the execution of any act.” The sense that we control our actions is real,
not illusion, but the mechanism is all brain-bound; for example, an idea
originating in the prefrontal cortex that calls up information or mem-
ories from parietal association cortex (Campbell, 2004).
To Flanagan, the “really hard problem” is finding “meaning in a
material world” (Flanagan, 2007). To this end, he explores “neuro-
existentialism,” the condition “caused by the rise of the scientific au-
thority of the human sciences and a resultant clash between the
scientific and the humanistic image of persons" (Flanagan and Caruso,
2018).
9.1.9. Papineau’s mind-brain identity
Philosopher David Papineau argues for neurobiological physicalism
with his theory of unabashed, robust, fundamental mind-brain identity.
It is an important argument, with implications for all materialist theories
(Papineau, 2020b).
In constructing the argument, one of Papineau’s intuitions is that
“there seems no immediate reason why consciousness should be singled
out as posing some special puzzle about its relation to the rest of reali-
ty”—given that “reality contains many different kind of things, biolog-
ical, meteorological, chemical, electrical, and so on, all existing
alongside each other, and all interacting causally in various ways”
(Papineau, 2020b).
One Papineau premise is that while we feel “conscious mind in-
fluences non-conscious matter, by controlling bodily behaviour, and
similarly that matter influences mind, giving rise to sensory experiences,
pains and other conscious mental states,” the “compelling argument …
against this kind of interactionist stance … derives from the so-called
‘causal closure of the physical’ … the physical realm seems causally
sufficient unto itself.”
Papineau notes that we remain puzzled about why brain states give
rise to mental states “in a way that we don’t feel puzzled about why NaCl
gives rise to salt, or electrical discharges to lightning.” He attributes our
puzzlement—the “explanatory gap” of consciousness—to the psycho-
social fact that “we find it hard to escape the spontaneous dualist
thought that the feeling and the physical state are not one thing, but two
different states that somehow invariably accompany each other”
(Papineau, 2020b).
Given this, Papineau says, “our knowledge of mind-brain identities
can only be based on some kind of a posteriori abductive inference,
rather than a principled a priori demonstration that a certain physical
state fills some specified role. For example, we might observe that pains
occur whenever prefrontal nociceptive-specific neurons fire, and vice
versa; we might also note that, if pains were the firing of nociceptive-
specific neurons, then this would account for a number of other
observed facts about pain, such as that it can be caused by trapped
nerves, and can be blocked by aspirin; and we might conclude on this
basis that pains are indeed identical to the firing of nociceptive-specific
neurons.” Papineau singles out “the peculiarly direct nature of our
concepts of conscious states” as what “stops us deriving mind-brain
identities a priori from the physical facts.”
In exploring the basis of identity claims, Papineau states “it can only
be on the basis of an abductive inference from direct empirical evidence,
such as that the two things in question are found in the same places and
the same times, and are observed to bear the same relations to other
things, not because we can deduce the identities a priori from the
physical facts.” His examples include “Cary Grant = Archie Leach”, and
“that dog = her pet.” “Why shouldn’t this same way of thinking be
applied to consciousness, he asks?” (Papineau, 2020b).
Because, he answers, “even after we are given all the abductive ev-
idence, we still find mind-brain identity claims almost impossible to
believe. We cannot resist the dualist conviction that conscious feelings
and the physical brain states are two different things.” And this, in
Papineau’s view, “is the real reason why we feel a need for further
explanation. We want to know why the neuronal activity is accompanied
by that conscious feeling, rather than by some other, or by no feeling at
all. Our dualist intuitions automatically generate a hankering for further
explanation.” Thus, Papineau concludes, “the demand for explanation
arises, not because something is lacking in physicalism, but because
something is lacking in us.”
“If only we could fully embrace physicalism,” Papineau suggests,
“the feeling of an explanatory gap would disappear. If we could fully
accept that pains are nociceptive-specific neuronal firing, then we would
stop asking why ‘they’ go together—after all, nothing can possibly come
apart from itself.”
To Papineau, this kind of robust physicalism can dissolve “the
problem of consciousness”. The move is to “simply deny that any puzzle
is raised by the fact that it feels painful to be a human with active
nociceptive-neurons. Why shouldn’t it feel like that? That’s how it turns
out. Why regard this as puzzling?” (Papineau, 2020a).
An insight is the connotation of verbs used to describe the relation
between mind and brain. Brain processes are said to “generate”, or
“yield”, or “cause”, or “give rise to” conscious states. But this phrase-
ology, Papineau says, undermines physicalism from the start—even
when used by physicalists. As he puts it, “Fire ‘generates’, ‘causes’,
‘yields’ or ‘gives rise to’ smoke. But NaCl doesn’t ‘generate’, ‘cause’,
‘yield’ or ‘give rise to’ salt. It is salt. The point is clear. To speak of brain
processes as ‘generating’ conscious states, and so on, only makes sense if
you are implicitly thinking of the conscious states as separate from the
brain states” (Papineau, 2020b). (But even if consciousness as an
“output” or “effect” of the brain were wrongheaded, why are only certain
sorts of neural activity identical with consciousness while others are
not?)
To sustain his argument, Papineau must deal with zombies. Are
zombies possible? “Could a being share all your physical properties but
have no conscious life?” Everybody’s first thought is, he says, “Sure. Just
duplicate the physical stuff and leave out the feelings.”
That’s the anti-physicalist “trap”: the physicalist has already lost.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
45
Papineau rightly states that physicalists must deny that zombies are
possible, “given that the mind is ontologically inseparable from the
brain.” If conscious states are physical states—radically identical—then,
he says, “the ‘two’ cannot come apart,” much like Marilyn Monroe
cannot exist without Norma Jean Baker. How could she exist without
herself? That makes no sense, he says.18
Papineau rejects the anti-physicalist argument that phenomenal
concepts are revelatory, in that they reveal conscious states not to be
physical. “Physicalists respond that there is no reason to suppose that
phenomenal concepts have the power to reveal such things … that ex-
periences are non-physical.” Why should introspection, he asks rhetor-
ically, “be guaranteed to tell us about all their necessary properties [of
experience]?” (Papineau, 2020b).
Papineau is blunt: “I never viewed the so-called ‘hard problem’ as
any problem at all.” The obvious answer, he says, is that brain processes
feel like something for the subjects that have them. “What’s so hard
about that?.. How would you expect them to feel? Like nothing? Why?
That’s how they feel when you have them.” The only reason that many
people believe there is a problem, Papineau stresses, is that “they can’t
stop thinking in dualist terms” (Papineau, 2020b).
As for the conventional materialist claim that ultimately neurosci-
ence will uncover the complete neurobiological basis of consciousness,
Papineau is skeptical. He does not expect that “there are definite facts
about consciousness to which we lack epistemological access—that
there is some material property that really constitutes being in pain, say,
but which we can’t find out about.” Rather, he argues, “our phenomenal
concepts of conscious states are vague—nothing in the semantic
constitution of phenomenal concepts determines precisely which of the
candidate material properties they refer to” (Papineau, 2003).
Scientific research, he says, will identify “a range of material prop-
erties that correlate in human beings with pain, say, or colors, or indeed
being conscious at all. However, this won’t pinpoint the material essence
of any such conscious state, for there will always be a plurality of such
human material correlates for any conscious property … It is not as if
conscious properties have true material essences, yet science is unable to
discover them. Rather the whole idea of identifying such essences is a
chimera, fostered by the impression that our phenomenal concepts of
conscious states are more precise than they are” (Papineau, 2003).
9.1.10. Goldstein’s mind-body problem
Philosopher-novelist Rebecca Newberger Goldstein centers the
mind-body problem around the nature of the person, with two distinct
kinds of descriptions: our physical bodies and brains, which science can,
in principle, analyze completely; and our inner thoughts, perceptions,
emotions, dreams, which science can never access completely (Gold-
stein, 2011a, 2011b).
Goldstein thinks that the internal description of what it’s like to be a
person—“what I try to do in creating a character in a novel”—is “really
about the body because ultimately there are no nonmaterial states.”
Goldstein states that the kind of stuff underlining these intentional
states or states of feeling that we describe in terms of consciousness is
entirely brain stuff. “Could we ever derive the one description from the
other? Could we ever know enough about the brain stuff so that we
could actually know everything there is to be a person, just by the
description of the brain stuff? I don’t think so” Goldstein (2011a),
2011b).
Goldstein says that panpsychism (13) seems plausible and she un-
derstands why some are dualists, where that internal point of view is
something that is not the body, and could, in principle, exist separate
from the body. She appreciates why some people who hope for
immortality hope dualism is true. (She herself rejects dualism.)
9.1.11. Hardcastle’s argument against materialism skeptics
Philosopher Valerie Gray Hardcastle argues that the points of divi-
sion between materialists and materialism-skeptics “are quite deep and
turn on basic differences in understanding the scientific enterprise.” This
disagreement, “the rifts,” which she frames, in part, between David
Chalmers and herself, concerns whether consciousness is a brute fact
about the world, which materialists deny and its skeptics affirm. Rather,
materialists believe that consciousness is part of the physical world, just
like everything else. “It is completely nonmysterious (though it is poorly
understood) [and materialists] have total and absolute faith that science
as it is construed today will someday explain this as it has explained the
other so-called mysteries of our age” (Section: Hardcastle, 1996).
Hardcastle gives her clear-eyed assessment: “I am a committed
materialist and believe absolutely and certainly that empirical investi-
gation is the proper approach in explaining consciousness. I also
recognize that I have little convincing to say to those opposed to me.
There are few useful conversations; there are even fewer converts.” She
epitomizes the skeptics’ position: “Isolating the causal relations associ-
ated with conscious phenomena would simply miss the boat, for there is
no way that doing that ever captures the qualitative aspects of aware-
ness. What the naturalists might do is illustrate when we are conscious,
but that won’t explain the why of consciousness.” Thus, she continues,
whatever the neural correlate(s) of consciousness may be, the naturalists
would not have explained why it is that (or those). Part of a good
explanation, skeptics maintain, “is making the identity statement (or
whatever) intelligible, plausible, reasonable” and this is what materi-
alists have not done and thus have not closed the explanatory gap.
In response, Hardcastle is frank: “To them, I have little to say in
defence of naturalism, for I think nothing that I as an already committed
naturalist could say would suffice, for we don’t agree on the terms of the
argument in the first place.” The consciousness identity, whatever it
turns out to be, could be a brute fact about the world, just like the laws of
physics. At some point, in all theories, explanations must end. Hard-
castle asks, “How do I make my identification of consciousness with
some neural activity intelligible to those who find it mysterious? My
answer is that I don’t. The solution to this vexing difficulty, such as it is,
is all a matter of attitude. That is, the problem itself depends on the spirit
in which we approach an examination of consciousness.” In character-
izing “consciousness-mysterians,” she states, “They are antecedently
convinced of the mysteriousness of consciousness and no amount of
scientific data is going to change that perspective. Either you already
believe that science is going to give you a correct identity statement, or
you don’t and you think that there is always going to be something left
over, the phenomenal aspects of conscious experience” (Hardcastle,
1996).
Hardcastle’s advice to skeptics? “Consciousness-mysterians need to
alter their concepts. To put it bluntly: their failure to appreciate the
world as it really is cuts no ice with science. Their ideas are at fault, not
the scientific method. Materialists presume that there is some sort of
identity statement for consciousness. (Of course, we don’t actually have
one yet, but for those of us who are not consciousness-mysterians, we
feel certain that one is in the offing.) Hence, the skeptics can’t really
imagine possible worlds in which consciousness is not whatever we ul-
timately discover it to be because they aren’t imagining consciousness in
those cases (or, they aren’t imagining properly). But nevertheless, what
can I say to those who insist that they can imagine consciousness as
beyond science’s current explanatory capacities? I think nothing …”
The fundamental difference between materialists and their skeptics,
according to Hardcastle, is that “Materialists are trying to explain to
each other what consciousness is within current scientific frameworks …
If you don’t antecedently buy into this project …, then a naturalist’s
explanation probably won’t satisfy you. It shouldn’t. But that is not the
fault of the explanation, nor is it the fault of the materialists. If you don’t
accept the rules, the game won’t make any sense” (Hardcastle, 1996).
Hardcastle’s own approach to consciousness includes: viewing it as a
lower-level dynamical structure underpinning our information
18 Papineau distinguishes possibility from conceivability. “A posteriori phys-
icalists have no choice but to allow that they [zombies] are at least conceivable,”
even if not possible (Papineau, 2020b).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
46
processing (Hardcastle, 1995); the relation between ontology and
explanation providing a framework for referring to mental states as
being the causally efficacious agents for some behavior (Hardcastle,
1998); a more nuanced approach to the neural correlates of conscious-
ness (NCC) in that it “there might not be an NCC—even if we adopt a
purely materialistic and reductionistic framework for explaining con-
sciousness (for example, perhaps consciousness is located out in the
world just as much as it is located inside the head) (Hardcastle, 2018;
Hardcastle and Raja, 1998); and action selection and projection to help
refine notions of consciousness from an embodied perspective (Hard-
castle, 2020).
9.1.12. Stoljar’s epistemic view and non-standard physicalism
Philosopher Daniel Stoljar has long focused on physicalism, its
interpretation, truth and philosophical significance; his views are
nuanced and largely deflationary (Stoljar, 2010). He defines physicalism
as the thesis that "every instantiated property is either physical or is
necessitated by some physical property," where physical property is
described by “all and only the following elements: it is a) a distinctive
property of intuitively physical objects, b) expressed by a predicate of
physics, c) objective, d) knowable through scientific investigation, and
e) not a distinctive property of souls, ectoplasm, etc.” (Montero, 2012).
According to Stoljar, "Physicalism has no formulations on which it is
both true and deserving of the name"—but this “does not entail that
philosophical problems stated in terms of it [physicalism] have no
reasonable formulation” (Stoljar, 2010; Montero, 2012).
As everyone knows, the philosophical problem of phenomenal con-
sciousness is the poster-child test case for physicalism, the standard
physicalist framework being that “consciousness can be explained by
contemporary physics, biology, neuroscience, and cognitive science”
(Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. i). To Stoljar, the problem (or problems) of
consciousness is “whether two big ideas can both be true together. The
first is the existence of consciousness. The second is a worldview (a
picture of everything that exists) that many people think you must
believe if you hold a vaguely scientific or rational approach to the world,
namely, physicalism.” Stoljar calls it the “compatibility problem”— “i.e.,
the problem of whether physicalism and claim that consciousness exists
can both be correct”—and he says that the solution is “right under our
nose.” The solution to the compatibility problem, Stoljar tells us, “is that
we are missing something”—and the depth and implications of this
simple statement are surprisingly profound (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, pp.
64–65).
What we are missing, according to Stoljar, “is a type of physical fact
or property relevant to consciousness. More than this, we are profoundly
ignorant of the nature of the physical world, and ignoring this ignorance
is what generates the problem.” He calls “the idea that we are ignorant of
a type of fact or property that is relevant to consciousness the ignorance
hypothesis” and he calls “the idea that the ignorance hypothesis solves
the compatibility problem the epistemic view.” Stoljar contends that all
arguments for the opposing view—i.e., that physicalism and con-
sciousness are incompatible—“fail, and for a single reason.” These ar-
guments, he says, “all presuppose that we have complete knowledge of
the physical facts relevant to consciousness. According to the epistemic
view, that presupposition is false, so the arguments [against
physicalism-consciousness compatibility] don’t work.” That physicalism
cannot be shown affirmatively to be true does not bother Stoljar,
because, he says, physicalism is an empirical truth, not an a priori
argument. “What the epistemic view says is that … there is no persuasive
‘here and now’ argument for incompatibility.” Thus, Stoljar argues, the
epistemic view helps us think about the problems of consciousness in a
clearer way, disentangling them from the compatibility problem (Kind
and Stoljar, 2023, pp. 64–66).
Stoljar is no traditional physicalist. He critiques “standard physi-
calism,” by which he means “versions of physicalism that make no
theoretical use of the ignorance hypothesis.” He conjectures that there
are properties of the physical world that go beyond the capacity of the
physical sciences to access and measure through its devices and in-
struments. Is this incapacity in practice, as per current science, or in
principle, such that ultimate truth is forever out of reach? Who knows?
Either way, he says, would support his ignorance hypothesis defense of
physicalism (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. 67). More subtly, Stolar contends
that the epistemic view does provide an “explanation of consciousness,”
at least in an abstract sense. “It tells us, for example, that conscious states
are not fundamental and so depend on other things, even if it leaves
open what exactly they depend on” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. 112).
Yet Stoljar believes it is possible to construct “a science of con-
sciousness”—to study “empirical laws between each conscious state and
some physical system”— but he is skeptical of “the attempt to provide
systematic knowledge of such laws” which he rejects as “implausible on
its own terms.” Preferring “to understand the science in a more modest
way,” Stoljar is ready to accept “that we do not and may never have a
complete theory of the world” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, pp. 67–68).
9.2. Neurobiological theories
Neurobiological theories are based primarily on known mechanisms
of the brain, such as neuronal transmission, brain circuits and con-
nectome pathways, electric fields, and, of course, neural correlates of
consciousness.
9.2.1. Edelman’s neural Darwinism and reentrant neural circuitry
Nobel laureate biologist Gerald Edelman presents a purely biological
theory of consciousness, founded on Darwinian natural selection and
complex brain morphology. His foundational commitment is that “the
neural systems underlying consciousness arose to enable high-order
discriminations in a multidimensional space of signals,” that “qualia
are those discriminations” and that “differences in qualia correlate with
differences in the neural structure and dynamics that underlie them”
(Edelman, 2000, 2003, 2024).
Rejecting theories that the brain is like a computer or instructional
system, Edelman proposes that “the brain is a selectional system, one in
which large numbers of variant circuits are generated epigenetically,
following which particular variants are selected over others during
experience. Such repertoires of variant circuits are degenerate, i.e.,
structurally different circuit variants within this selectional system can
carry out the same function or produce the same output. Subsequent to
their incorporation into anatomical repertoires during development,
circuit variants that match novel signals are differentially selected
through changes in synaptic efficacy. Differential amplification of
selected synaptic populations in groups of neurons increases the likeli-
hood that, in the future, adaptive responses of these groups will occur
following exposure to similar signals” (Edelman, 2003).
Edelman’s way of thinking is motivated by his work on the immune
system (for which he was awarded the Nobel) and his theory is devel-
oped in two domains: Neural Darwinism (neural group selection) and
Dynamic Core (reentrant neural circuitry).
Neural Darwinism is “the idea that higher brain functions are
mediated by developmental and somatic selection upon anatomical and
functional variance occurring in each individual animal” (Edelman,
1989). Neural Darwinism has two aspects: (i) development selection,
which controls the gross anatomy and microstructure of the brain,
allowing for great variability in the neural circuitry; and (ii) experiential
selection, especially of the synaptic structure where functional plasticity
is essential given the vast number of synapses (estimated at over 100
trillion, possibly 600 trillion or more). Edelman notes that a child’s brain
contains many more neural connections than will ultimately survive to
maturity—estimates go as high as 1000 trillion—and he argues that this
redundant capacity, this functional plasticity, is needed because “neu-
rons are the only cells in the body that cannot be renewed and because
only those networks best adapted to their ultimate purpose will be
selected as they organize into neuronal groups” (Edelman, 2024). Ac-
cording to Edelman’s theory of neuronal group selection (TNGS),
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
47
“selectional events in the brain are necessarily constrained by the ac-
tivity of diffuse ascending value systems. The activity of these systems
affects the selectional process by modulating or altering synaptic
thresholds” (Edelman, 2003).
Dynamic Core is Edelman’s term encompassing reentrant neural
circuitry, the ongoing process of recursive signaling among neuronal
groups taking place across networks of massively parallel reciprocal fi-
bers, especially in the connections between thalamus and cerebral cor-
tex. This dynamic, relentless activity in thalamocortical circuits
generates a continuing sequence of different metastable states that
change over time, yet each of which has a unitary phenomenology at any
given moment. Edelman asserts "there is no other object in the known
universe so completely distinguished by reentrant circuitry as the
human brain" (Edelman, 2003, 2024).
Edelman stresses that reentry is “a selectional process occurring in
parallel” and that “it differs from feedback, which is instructional and
involves an error function that is serially transmitted over a single
pathway.” As a result of the correlations that reentry imposes on diverse,
interacting neuronal groups, “synchronously active circuits across
widely distributed brain areas are selectively favored.” This, Edelman
suggests, “provides a solution to the so-called binding problem: how do
functionally segregated areas of the brain correlate their activities in the
absence of an executive program or superordinate map?” Binding of the
outputs of every sensory modality, each generated by segregated cortical
areas, is essential for our commonly perceived but underappreciated
unity of consciousness (Edelman, 2003).
It is worth noting the close relationship between the Dynamic Core
and Global Workspace (9.2.3) hypotheses, as jointly suggested by the
authors of each, Edelman and Baars—each hypothesis having been put
forward, independently, “to provide mechanistic and biologically
plausible accounts of how brains generate conscious mental content.”
Whereas “the Dynamic Core proposes that reentrant neural activity in
the thalamocortical system gives rise to conscious experience,” the
“Global Workspace reconciles the limited capacity of momentary
conscious content with the vast repertoire of long-term memory.” The
close relationship between the two hypotheses is said to allow “for a
strictly biological account of phenomenal experience and subjectivity
that is consistent with mounting experimental evidence.” The authors
suggest that “there is now sufficient evidence to consider the design and
construction of a conscious artifact” (Edelman et al., 2011).
The theory of neuronal group selection (TNGS), pioneered by Edel-
man (1987), has come to undergird a cluster of theories. As Anil Seth
explains, “According to the TNGS, primary (sensory) consciousness
arose in evolution when ongoing perceptual categorization was linked
via reentry to a value-dependent memory creating the so-called
‘remembered present’ (Edelman 1989). Higher-order consciousness,
distinguished in humans by an explicit sense of self and the ability to
construct past and future scenes, arose at a later stage with reentrant
pathways linking value-dependent categorization with linguistic per-
formance and conceptual memory (Edelman 2003; Seth, 2007).
As Edelman’s mechanism for consciousness is based on the TNGS, he
first distinguishes primary from higher-order consciousness. “Animals
with primary consciousness can integrate perceptual and motor events
together with memory to construct a multimodal scene in the pre-
sent”—what James called the “specious present” and which Edelman
calls “the remembered present” (Edelman, 1989). Such an animal with
primary consciousness, Edelman says, “has no explicit narrative capa-
bility (although it has long-term memory), and, at best, it can only plan
to deal with the immediate scene in the remembered present” (Edelman,
2003).
As for higher-order consciousness, Edelman is mainstream: “It
emerges later in evolution and is seen in animals with semantic capa-
bilities such as chimpanzees. It is present in its richest form in the human
species, which is unique in possessing true language made up of syntax
and semantics. Higher-order consciousness allows its possessors to go
beyond the limits of the remembered present of primary consciousness.
An individual’s past history, future plans, and consciousness of being
conscious all become accessible” (Edelman, 2003).
How did the neural mechanisms underlying primary consciousness
arise during evolution? Edelman’s proposal is as follows. “At some time
around the divergence of reptiles into mammals and then into birds, the
embryological development of large numbers of new reciprocal con-
nections allowed rich reentrant activity to take place between the more
posterior brain systems carrying out perceptual categorization and the
more frontally located systems responsible for value-category memory.
This reentrant activity provided the neural basis for integration of a
scene with all of its entailed qualia … [which] conferred an adaptive
evolutionary advantage” (Edelman, 2003).
In summary, according to Edelman, “consciousness arises as a result
of integration of many inputs by reentrant interactions in the dynamic
core. This integration occurs in periods of <500 ms. Selection occurs
among a set of circuits in the core repertoire; given their degeneracy, a
number of different circuits can carry out similar functions. As a result of
the continual interplay of signals from the environment, the body, and
the brain itself, each integrated core state is succeeded by yet another
and differentiated neural state in the core … The sequences and
conjoined arrays of qualia entailed by this neural activity are the higher-
order discriminations that such neural events make possible. Underlying
each quale are distinct neuroanatomical structures and neural dynamics
that together account for the specific and distinctive phenomenal
property of that quale. Qualia thus reflect the causal sequences of the
underlying metastable neural states of the complex dynamic core”
(Edelman, 2003).
Finally, Edelman addresses the hard problem. “The fact that it is only
by having a phenotype capable of giving rise to those qualia that their
‘quality’ can be experienced is not an embarrassment to a scientific
theory of consciousness. Looked at in this way, the so-called hard
problem is ill posed, for it seems to be framed in the expectation that, for
an observer, a theoretical construct can lead by description to the
experiencing of the phenomenal quality being described. If the
phenomenal part of conscious experience that constitutes its entailed
distinctions is irreducible, so is the fact that physics has not explained
why there is something rather than nothing. Physics is not hindered by
this ontological limit nor should the scientific understanding of con-
sciousness be hindered by the privacy of phenomenal experience.”
Edelman is confident. “At the end of our studies, when we have grasped
its mechanisms in greater detail, consciousness will lose its mystery and
be generally accepted as part of the natural order” (Edelman, 2003).
Personally, I like analogizing the something/nothing ontological
limit in physics to the phenomenal consciousness psychophysical pri-
vacy limit in neuroscience—the two ultimate questions of existence and
sentience. But I hesitate to draw the analogy too tightly. Something/
nothing is a kind of historical question of what happened, that is,
explaining the hypothetical process. For example, it could be that
nothing is in principle impossible. Phenomenal consciousness is a clearly
contemporary question of what is, that is, explaining the actual thing.
Moreover, I agree that even with its something/nothing ontological
limit, physics can do its work, as with its phenomenal consciousness
privacy limit, neuroscience can do its work. But that work, remember,
constitutes the “easy problems.”
9.2.2. Crick and Koch’s neural correlates of consciousness (NCC)
The neural correlates of consciousness (NCC) is defined as the min-
imum activities in the brain jointly sufficient (and probably necessary)
for any one specific conscious perception, and, extended, for subjective
experience in general, the inner awareness of qualia. Originally applied
to sleep and wakefulness (i.e., the reticular activating system in the brain
stem), the NCC were formally proposed by Francis Crick and Christof
Koch as a scientific approach to what had been believed to be the vague,
metaphysical and somewhat discredited idea of consciousness (Crick
and Koch, 1990), a program then championed by Koch (Koch, 2004,
Closer To Truth) and others (though Koch has become something of a
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
48
“romantic reductionist” [Koch, 2012a]).
While there are complex methodological issues, NCC mechanisms
include neuronal electrophysiological action potentials (spikes), their
frequencies and sequences; neurochemical transmitter flows in the
synapses between neurons; and recurrent brain circuits in specific brain
areas. An example is clusters of neurons that underlie wakefulness in the
brainstem connecting to clusters of neurons in the thalamus, hypothal-
amus, basal ganglia and cerebral cortex related to awareness/con-
sciousness (Wong, 2023).
Similarly, a "default ascending arousal network" (dANN) has been
proposed, with subcortical nodes in the brainstem, hypothalamus,
thalamus, and basal forebrain (Edlow, 2024). While necessary for
conscious arousal and wakefulness, the dANN is not sufficient for
phenomenal conscioiusness and is not what this Landscape is about.
As an example of the NCC way of thinking, an early NCC candidate
was the claustrum, which receives input from almost all regions of
cortex and projects back to almost all regions of cortex, and which, Crick
and Koch speculated, could give rise to “integrated conscious percepts.”
They used the analogy of the claustrum to a “conductor” and the cortex
to an “orchestra,” such that the claustrum as a conductor ‘coordinates a
group of players in the orchestra, the various cortical regions.” Without
the conductor, as they build the analogy, “players can still play but they
fall increasingly out of synchrony with each other. The result is a ca-
cophony of sounds.” In the absence of the claustra in both cerebral
hemispheres, attributes such as sensory modalities “may not be experi-
enced in an integrated manner and the subject may fail to altogether
perceive these objects or events or only be consciously aware of some
isolated attribute.” This would mean, they suggest, “that different at-
tributes of objects … are rapidly combined and bound in the claustrum”
(Crick and Koch, 2005).
A more recent candidate for full and content-specific NCC is located
in the posterior cerebral cortex, in a temporo-parietal-occipital hot zone
(Koch et al., 2016), though no one is yelling “Eureka” and the search
continues. Even so, while everyone knows that even strong correlation is
not causation, strong correlation is still something. NCCs can be
considered macroscopic materialism.
It was in 1998 that Christof Koch made the now legendary 25-year
bet with philosopher David Chalmers—they are long-time friend-
s—that neuroscientists would discover a “clear” NCC by 2023. No sur-
prise that the bet paid off in Chalmers’ favor. (Koch presented Chalmers
with a case of 1978 Madeira wine.) As Chalmers said, notwithstanding
neuroscience’s great progress, “It’s clear that things are not clear,” while
Koch, feigning chagrin, agreed (Horgan, 2023).
Koch was down but not out: he may have lost this consciousness
battle, but the consciousness war would still be waged. Koch offered to
re-up: another bet, another 25 years to achieve that “clear” NCC, another
case of wine. “I hope I lose,” Chalmers said, smiling, taking the new bet,
“but I suspect I’ll win.”
The smart money is again on Chalmers, although I have a different
issue. What would a “clear” NCC mean? Suppose a specific group of
neurons were proven to be both necessary and sufficient for a particular
conscious experience, a direct correlation that no other group of neurons
could claim? Koch would rightly win the bet, but would consciousness
have been explained? Still, the perennial question: How can action po-
tentials zipping along neurons and chemicals flowing between neurons
literally be the phenomenal consciousness of inner experience? By what
magic?
9.2.3. Baars’s and Dehaene’s global workspace theory
Proposed originally by Bernard Baars (Baars, 1988, 1997, 2002),
extended with neuroimaging and computer modeling by Stanislas
Dehaene (Dehaene and Naccache, 2000), the core claim of Global
Workplace Theory (GWT) is brain-wide presence and broad accessibility
of specific multi-sensory, multi-cognitive information, the total package
being what constitutes conscious awareness. GWT is founded on the
concept of an inner “theater of consciousness,” where the mental
spotlight of awareness shines on sequential sets of integrated percep-
tions that are dominant, at least momentarily. (The global workspace
“Theater of Consciousness” is said not to contradict Dennett’s rejected
“Cartesian Theater,” because the former is not dualistic and does not
reside in only one location in the brain; rather, the Theater of Con-
sciousness is passive not active and is spread across much of the brain.)
GWT holds that conscious mental states are those which are “globally
available” to a wide range of brain processes including attention,
perception, assessment, memory, verbal description, and motor
response. Which sets of integrated perceptions become dominant, move
to centerstage, and thus leap into conscious awareness? It’s a competi-
tion. Diverse data flows originating both within the brain (e.g., mem-
ories) and from external stimuli (i.e., sensory information) are in
constant competition, such that the “winner” is broadcast broadly (i.e.,
globally) in the brain and becomes accessible throughout the brain,
which is how we become aware of it as the content of our consciousness.
This brain-wide focus on a particular phenomenological package
integrates all the relevant sensory and cognitive streams by recruiting all
the relevant brain areas into an organic whole—while inhibiting other,
extraneous, conflicting data flows—such that what resides in the global
workspace is perceived as consciousness “snapshots” in continuous,
movie-like motion. This means that while our conscious awareness may
seem unified and seamless, in fact it is neither.
Whereas GWT started in the 1980s as a purely psychological theory
of conscious cognition, it has become a “family” of theories adapted to
today’s far more detailed understanding of the brain. The brain-based
version of GWT is called Global Workspace Dynamics because the cor-
tex is viewed as a “unified oscillatory machine”. GWT, therefore, ac-
cording to its advocates, joins other theories in taking consciousness as
the product of highly integrated and widespread cortico-thalamic ac-
tivity, including evidence that the prefrontal cortex participates in the
visual conscious stream. Cortex is extraordinarily flexible in its dynamic
recruitment of different regions for different tasks. Therefore, an arbi-
trary division between prefrontal and other neuronal regions is said to
be misleading. Consciousness requires a much broader, more integrative
view (Baars et al., 2021).
In a pioneering set of “adversarial collaboration” experiments to test
hypotheses of consciousness by getting rival researchers to collaborate
on the study design,19 preliminary results did not perfectly match GWT’s
prediction that consciousness arises when information is broadcast to
areas of the brain through an interconnected network. The transmission,
according to GWT, happens at the beginning and end of an experience
and involves the prefrontal cortex, at the front of the brain. But inde-
pendent “theory-neutral” researchers found that only some aspects of
consciousness, but not all of them, could be identified in the prefrontal
cortex. Moreover, while they found evidence of brain broadcasting, the
core of GWT, it was only at the beginning of an experience—not also at
the end, as had been predicted. Further experiments are to come, but
revisions to GWT are believed likely (Lenharo, 2023a,b, 2024).
9.2.4. Dennett’s multiple drafts model
In his intellectual memoirs, I’ve Been Thinking, philosopher Daniel
Dennett highlights two fundamental questions on which his career is
founded—the two related philosophical problems he set himself to
solve. “First, how can it be that some complicated clumps of molecules
can be properly described as having states or events that are about
something, that have meaning or content. And second, how can it be that
at least some of these complicated clumps of molecules are conscious-
—that is, aware that they are gifted with states or events that are about
something?” (Dennett, 2023a, 2023b).
In dealing with these questions, Dennett realized, way back in his
PhD dissertation in 1965, that “the best—and only—way of making
19 The adversarial experiments are envisioned and sponsored by the Temple-
ton World Charity Foundation.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
49
sense of the mind and consciousness is through evolution by natural
selection on many levels.” Dennett’s core insight subsuming biological
evolution in general and the development of mind in particular is
concise: reasons without a reasoner, design without a designer, and
competence without comprehension (Dennett, 2007).
Dennett’s theory of consciousness is distinguished by four ideas: (i)
there is no “Cartesian Theater,” no inner witness viewing the con-
sciousness show; (ii) different brain regions or modules develop
different kinds of content, which Dennett calls “multiple drafts”; (iii) the
multiple drafts compete with one another for attention, the winner of
the winner-take-all competition occupying the entirety of the conscious
moment, which Dennett calls “fame in the brain”; and (iv) the collection
of all these conscious moments coalesces into a kind of life story, the
emergence of a sense of “self,” which Dennett describes as a “center of
narrative gravity.”
In Consciousness Explained, Dennett presents his multiple drafts
model of consciousness (Dennett, 1992). He states that all varieties of
perception, thought, or mental activity are processed in the brain via
parallel, multitrack interpretations and elaborations, subject to contin-
uous "editorial revision.” These “yield, over the course of time, some-
thing rather like a narrative stream or sequence, the product of continual
editing by many processes distributed around the brain.” Dennett has
the brain consisting of a "bundle of semi-independent agencies," and his
metaphor “fame in the brain” tells us what it takes for competing ideas to
determine the content of consciousness at any given moment.
In supporting his theory, Dennett needs to undermine what we take
to be common sense. He challenges the verisimilitude of inner experi-
ence, which he calls more like theorizing than like describing. He rejects
the notion of a single central location (his "Cartesian theater") where
conscious experience can be “viewed.” He dissolves the idea of the “self”
as the central character of stories made up by content fixation and
propagation in the brain. Moreover, he argues that the properties of
qualia are incompatible and therefore incoherent, thus obviating the
need to solve Chalmers’s hard problem.20 Dennett needs all four of these
counterintuitive yet deeply probative assertions; the package is admi-
rably coherent, but buying it is a tall order.
Of Dennett’s four assertions, his desired demolition of qualia is
perhaps his most critical move. Here is how he defends it. “Qualia are
user-illusions, ways of being informed about things that matter to us in
the world (our affordances) because of the way we and the environment
we live in (microphysically) are. They are perfectly real illusions! They
just aren’t what they seem to be; they are not intrinsic, unanalyzable
properties of mental states; they are highly structured and complex
activated neural networks that dispose us to do all sorts of things in
response—such as declare that we’re seeing something blue. The key
move is to recognize that we have underprivileged access to the source or
cause of our convictions about what we experience” (Rosenberg and
Dennett, 2020).
Ironically, while Dennett calls as evidence “user illusions” in his case
to deflate consciousness and support materialism, cognitive psychologist
Donald Hoffman calls as evidence “user illusions” in his case to inflate
consciousness and deny materialism. (16.5). This contrasting interpre-
tation of precisely the same data by two first-rate thinkers is fascinating,
perhaps telling.
Dennett is not shy in asserting that people still underestimate by a
wide margin the challenges that the brain-in-vat thought experiment
raises for views of consciousness other than Dennett’s own. The key fact
is that “you don’t know anything ‘privileged’ about the causation of your own
thoughts. You cannot know ‘from the inside” what events cause you to
think you see something as red or green, for instance, or cause you to
push button A instead of button B.” In short, to truly understand con-
sciousness, Dennett says “you need to go outside yourself and adopt the
‘third-person point of view’ of science” (Dennett, 2023a, 2023b).
Dennett stresses the importance of treating subjects’ beliefs about
their own consciousness as “data to be explained, not necessarily as true
accounts of mental reality.” He states, “This is the major fault line in
philosophy of mind today, with John Searle, Tom Nagel, David
Chalmers, Galen Strawson, and Philip Goff [all represented in this
paper], among others, thinking they can just insist they know better.
They don’t. Those who object, who hold out for some sort of ‘first-person
science of consciousness,’ have yet to describe any experiments or re-
sults that are trustworthy but unobtainable by heterophenomenology”
(the term Dennett coined for the third-person method, the phenome-
nology of other minds, which is standard procedure in cognitive science).
Dennett says his meeting with leading scientific researchers on con-
sciousness enabled him “to begin to form at least vague ideas of how
mechanisms of the brain might do all the work,” but only, he insists, “if
we deflated some of the overconfident pronouncements of introspectors
about the marvels of the phenomena” (Dennett, 2023a, 2023b).
In describing his early book, Content and Consciousness, where he puts
content before consciousness, Dennett differentiates himself from John
Searle, who puts consciousness before content. Although Searle and
Dennett are both biological naturalists and both, for example, eschew
panpsychism, Dennett believes that by prioritizing content, the mystery
of consciousness is mitigated.
Dennett has had a long, friendly, though surely adversarial rela-
tionship with Chalmers. “Even expert scientists have been fooled by
Chalmers’ ‘the Hard Problem’ into thinking that there’s one big myste-
rious fact that needs explaining, when in fact there are hundreds of lesser
problems that can be solved without any scientific revolutions, and
when they are all solved, the so-called Hard Problem will evaporate”
(Dennett, 2023a, 2023b).
It is worth noting the more general case of a multiple module way of
thinking, which posits separate if not independent cognitive components
of the mind rooted in the brain (though not needing to correspond to
identifiable brain structures). (9.2.5.)
9.2.5. Minsky’s society of mind
Artificial intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky calls the multiple semi-
independent modules in the human mind, generated by physically
locatable modules in the human brain, The Society of Mind (not coinci-
dentally the name of his book). It is a model of human cognition con-
structed, step by step, from the nonconscious interactions of simple
mindless elements he calls “agents” (Minsky, 1986).
“What does it mean to say you’re aware of yourself?” Minsky asks. It
would be impossible “for any one part of the brain to know what’s
happening in all the other parts of the brain because there’s just too
much. Each part of the brain has connections to other parts of the brain
and can get some ideas, but there’s no place that knows everything”
(Minsky, 2007b).
“The Society of Mind,” according to Minsky, is the end product of a
vast evolutionary history, beginning with just clumps of neurons.
Because neurons evolved early and had to keep their physiological
integrity, progress was made by neurons gathering together, which led
to the first small brains, and when these small brains began to specialize
as well as to associate, “mind” began to develop (Minsky, 2007b).
Minsky is as blunt as he is insightful. “While many neuroscientists
focus on how brain cells [neurons] work, to me, that’s pretty much like
trying to understand a computer from how transistors work. The neu-
rons and synapses are maybe six levels of organization below the
thoughts that you’re actually aware of, the important things that
distinguish a human from a crayfish. These high-level descriptions are
what counts, and each of them has to be understood by itself. Any
particular thing that happens in Level 5 can be understood as a
20 Two witticisms exchanged by Dan Dennett and Dave Chalmers at the 2014
“Toward a Science of Consciousness” conference in Tucson, organized and
managed by Stuart Hameroff and co-organized in some years by Chalmers. Dan:
“I now know what it feels like to be a policeman at Woodstock.” Dave:
“Everyone has a crazy theory about the ‘hard problem’—even Dan, who says
there is no ‘hard problem.’”
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
50
combination of maybe 20 or 50 things that happen in Level 4 and so
forth. But you can’t understand Level 5 even if you know everything
about how neurons and synapses work. The difference between a human
and a crayfish is that a human has these multiple levels of brain orga-
nization that the earlier animals did not have” (Minsky, 2007b).
Actually, Minsky says, “I’m interested in how this piece of machine,
the brain, can do things like decide that what it’s doing isn’t working.
How does it develop new goals? How does it develop new methods for
achieving its goals? And, most important, how does it make a model of
itself as a being in a world and think high-level stuff about its own past
and its future?”
It has been known for well over 100 years that the brain has many
different parts. Minsky envisions something “like a great network of
computers, each of which is specialized. It’s not that it’s a society of little
people, but rather a society of biological machines, say 400 or more of
these, each with different top-level functions, including the capacity to
imagine planning proposals and counterfactual histories.”
Minsky speculates that cortical columns of related neurons, which
are intermediate in complexity, can store things for a certain period
without any changes in probability or conductions. We evolved these
structures, he says, “so we could have reliable short-term memories that
represent knowledge in many different ways.” In context, Minsky advises
studying “insulation theory.” He says, “Theorists called ‘connectionists’
say what’s important about the brain is how things are connected to
each other. You could argue that it’s even more important to know how
things are insulated from each other—why you don’t get a big traffic jam
because there’s too many connections” (Minsky, 2007b).
9.2.6. Graziano’s attention schema theory
Advanced by neuroscientist Michael Graziano, attention schema
theory asserts that for the brain to handle a profusion of information it
must have developed a quick and dirty model, a simplified version of
itself, which it then reports “as a ghostly, non-physical essence, a
magical ability to mentally possess items” (Graziano, 2019a, 2019b). He
likens the attention schema to “a self-reflecting mirror: it is the brain’s
representation of how the brain represents things, and is a specific
example of higher-order thought. In this account, consciousness isn’t so
much an illusion as a self-caricature.”
Graziano claims that this idea, attention schema theory, gives a
simple reason, straight from control engineering, for why the trait of
consciousness would evolve, namely, to monitor and regulate attention
in order to control actions in the world. Thus, Graziano argues that “the
attention schema theory explains how a biological, information pro-
cessing machine can claim to have consciousness, and how, by intro-
spection (by assessing its internal data), it cannot determine that it is a
machine whose claims are based on computations” (Graziano, 2019a,
2019b).
9.2.7. Prinz’s neurofunctionalism: how attention engenders experience
Philosopher Jesse Prinz accounts for consciousness with two main
claims: first, consciousness always arises at a particular stage of
perceptual processing, the intermediate stage; and second, conscious-
ness depends on attention. “Attention” is Prinz’s focus in that it “changes
the flow of information allowing perceptual information to access
memory systems.” Neurobiologically, he says, “this change in flow de-
pends on synchronized neural firing. Neural synchrony is also impli-
cated in the unity of consciousness and in the temporal duration of
experience” (Prinz, 2012).
What Prinz calls “attention” is a particular process of making an
integrated representation of a stimulus’ multiple properties, as
perceived from a given point of view, available to working memo-
ry—and it is this process, and only this process, that generates con-
sciousness. “Intermediateness,” as Prinz’s term of art, locates the critical
transformation when representations are “integrated into a point-of-
view-retaining format that gets made available by this ’attention pro-
cess’” to working memory. This is why Prinz’s theory earns the
appellation, “Attended Intermediate Representation Theory” (Mole,
2013). [Note: Prinz’s theory could be classified under Representational
Theories.]
In exploring the limits of consciousness, Prinz states, “We have no
direct experience of our thoughts, no experience of motor commands,
and no experience of a conscious self.” His strong assertion is that “All
consciousness is perceptual, and it functions to make perceptual infor-
mation available to systems that allow for flexible behavior.” Thus, Prinz
provides “a neuroscientifically grounded response to the leading argu-
ment for dualism,” and he argues that “materialists need not choose
between functional and neurobiological approaches, but can instead
combine these into neurofunctional response to the mind-body prob-
lem” (Prinz, 2012).
Prinz encourages a direct, head-to-head competition, as it were,
between his neurofunctionalism and David Chalmers’s hard problem
(Mole, 2013). “Where he [Chalmers] sought to synthesize two decades
of dualist argumentation, I [Prinz] try here to synthesize two decades of
empirical exploration” (Prinz, 2012; Mole, 2013). Whereas Chalmers
famously declares that “no explanation given in wholly physical terms
can ever account for the emergence of conscious experience.”). Prinz
counters that there is now “a satisfying and surprisingly complete theory
[contained entirely within materialism] of how consciousness arises in
the human brain” (Prinz, 2012).
9.2.8. Sapolsky’s hard incompatibilism
Neuroendocrinologist and biological anthropologist Robert Sapolsky
counts himself as a “hard incompatibilist,” affirming the truth of
determinism (i.e., all events and actions are the product of prior events
and actions) and denying the existence of free will. There is no possi-
bility, he says, “of reconciling our being biological organisms built on
the physical rules of the universe with there being free will, a soul, a ‘Me’
inside there which is somehow free of biology. You have to choose one
or the other and, philosophically, I am completely in the direction of us
being nothing more or less than our biology (and its interactions with
the environment)” (Sapolsky, 2023b).
Sapolsky’s target is free will, not consciousness, but to deal with free
will, he must deal with consciousness—after all, free will, if it exists,
would be a product of consciousness, not the reverse.
But Sapolsky is a reluctant consciousness warrior. Introducing a
section of his book labeled “What Is Consciousness?”, he enjoys some
self-deprecation. “Giving this section this ridiculous heading,” he says,
seemingly smiling, “reflects how unenthused I am about having to write
this next stretch. I don’t understand what consciousness is, can’t define
it. I can’t understand philosophers’ writing about it. Or neuroscientists’,
for that matter, unless it’s ‘consciousness’ in the boring neurological
sense, like not experiencing consciousness because you’re in a coma”
(Sapolsky, 2023a).
Referencing the Libet experiments (9.1.2), which purport to disso-
ciate conscious awareness from brain decision-making, Sapolsky argues
that “three different techniques, monitoring the activity of hundreds of
millions of neurons down to single neurons, all show that at the moment
when we believe that we are consciously and freely choosing to do
something, the neurobiological die has already been cast. That sense of
conscious intent is an irrelevant afterthought.” In another context with
another metaphor, he calls consciousness “an irrelevant hiccup” (Sap-
olsky, 2023a).
Yet Sapolsky is not prepared to dismiss consciousness as “just an
epiphenomenon, an illusory, reconstructive sense of control irrelevant
to our actual behavior.” This strikes me, he says, “as an overly dogmatic
way of representing just one of many styles of neuroscientific thought on
the subject” (Sapolsky, 2023a).
Pushed to state what he believes consciousness is, Sapolsky demurs.
“Consciousness is beyond me to understand—every few years I read a
review from the people trying to understand it on a neurobiological
level, and I cannot understand a word of what they are saying. For me,
consciousness arises as a ‘complex emergent property’—which explains
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
51
everything and nothing” (Sapolsky, 2023b).
9.2.9. Mitchell’s free agents
While neuroscientist Kevin Mitchell argues, contra many scientists
and philosophers, that free will, or agency, is not an illusion—that “we
are not mere machines responding to physical forces but agents acting
with purpose”—he still asserts, "you cannot escape the fact that our
consciousness and our behavior emerge from the purely physical
workings of the brain” (Mitchell, 2023, p. 3).
Mitchell mounts an evolutionary case for how living beings capable
of choice arose from lifeless matter, stressing “the emergence of nervous
systems provided a means to learn about the world,” thus enabling
sentient animals to model, predict, and simulate. These faculties reach
their peak in humans with our capacities “to imagine and to be intro-
spective, to reason in the moment, and to shape our possible futures
through the exercise of our individual agency” (Mitchell, 2023).
Normally, there is high correlation between those who deny “real”
(libertarian) free will with the commitment that consciousness is
entirely physical, and conversely, those who affirm “real” (libertarian)
free will, are more likely to opt for nonphysical theories. Mitchell is
significant in that he defends “real” free will, but unambiguously has
consciousness as entirely physical. He describes creaturely acts of what
he considers “free will” before consciousness even evolved. “Thoughts
are not immaterial,” he says; “they are physically instantiated in pat-
terns of neural activity in various parts of the brain … There’s no need to
posit a ‘ghost in the machine’—you’re not haunting your own brain. The
‘ghost’ is the machine at work” (Mitchell, 2023, pp. 267–268).
9.2.10. Bach’s cortical conductor theory
Cognitive scientist Joscha Bach posits a functional explanation for
phenomenal consciousness, the cortical conductor theory (CTC), where
“cortical structures are the result of reward-driven learning, based on
signals of the motivational system, and the structure of the data that is
being learned.” Critical is the “conductor,” which is “a computational
structure that is trained to regulate the activity of other cortical func-
tionality. It directs attention, provides executive function by changing
the activity and parameterization and rewards of other cortical struc-
tures, and integrates aspects of the processes that it attended to into a
protocol. This protocol is used for reflection and learning” (Section:
Bach, 2019).
Bach has CTC’s “elementary agents” as columns in the cerebral
cortex that “self-organize into the larger organizational units of the brain
areas as a result of developmental reinforcement learning. The activity
of the cortical orchestra is highly distributed and parallelized, and
cannot be experienced as a whole.” However, its performance is coor-
dinated by the conductor, which is not a homunculus, “but like the other
instruments, a set of dynamic function approximators” (situated in
prefrontal cortex21). Whereas most cortical instruments, he says,
“regulate the dynamics and interaction of the organism with the envi-
ronment (or anticipated, reflected and hypothetical environments), the
conductor regulates the dynamics of the orchestra itself.” The process is
based on signals of the motivational system and it provides executive
function, resolves conflicts between cortical agents, and regulates their
activities (Bach, 2019).
“The conductor is the only place where experience is integrated,”
Bach states. “Information that is not integrated in the protocol cannot
become functionally relevant to the reflection of the system, to the
production of its utterances, the generation of a cohesive self model, and
it cannot become the object of access consciousness.” Without the
conductor, he asserts, our brain can still perform most of its functions,
but we would be “sleepwalkers, capable of coordinated perceptual and
motor action, but without central coherence and reflection.”
Memories empower Bach’s theory. “Memories can be generated by
reactivating a cortical configuration via the links and parameters stored
at the corresponding point in the protocol. Reflective access to the
protocol is a process that can itself be stored in the protocol, and by
accessing this, a system may remember having had experiential access.”
For phenomenal consciousness, Bach claims “it is necessary and suffi-
cient that a system can access the memory of having had an experi-
ence—the actuality of experience itself is irrelevant.”
Phenomenal consciousness, according to Bach, “may simply be un-
derstood as the most recent memory of what our prefrontal cortex
attended to. Thus, conscious experience is not an experience of being in
the world, or in an inner space, but a memory. It is the reconstruction of
a dream generated [by] more than fifty brain areas, reflected in the
protocol of a single region. By directing attention to its own protocol, the
conductor can store and recreate a memory of its own experience of
being conscious” (Bach, 2019).
Unlike Integrated Information Theory (12), Bach says CTC is a
functionalist model of consciousness, with similarity to other function-
alist approaches, such as the ones suggested by Dennett (9.2.4) and
Graziano (9.2.6) (Bach, 2019).
9.2.11. Brain circuits and cycles theories
Brain circuits and cycles as mechanisms of consciousness are older
explanations, no longer considered sufficient in themselves, having
evolved into more sophisticated theories. Brain circuits cover the
following kinds of large-scale brain structures: lateral pathways across
the cerebral cortex linking diverse cortical areas (e.g., especially in the
prefrontal, cingulate and parietal regions of the cortex, which are
involved in higher-level activities such as planning and reasoning); the
reticular activating system focusing attention, shaping behaviors, and
stimulating motivation; and vertical thalamocortical radiations medi-
ating sensory and motor systems.22 Brain cycles cover electroencepha-
logram (EEG) waves over broad regions of the cerebral cortex, the
product of massive numbers of neurons firing synchronously (e.g.,
gamma waves at 40 Hz).
A contemporary explanation recruits bidirectional information
transfer between the cortex and the thalamus—recurrent cortico-
thalamic and thalamocortical pathways—which are said to regulate
consciousnesss. Evidence suggests "a highly preserved spectral channel
of cortical-thalamic communication that is present during conscious
states, but which is diminished during the loss of consciousness and
enhanced during psychchedlic states" (Toker et al., 2024).
Dendritic Integration Theory (DIT), linking neurobiology and phe-
nomenology, relates cellular-level mechanisms to conscioius experience
by leveraging "the intricate complexities of dendritic processing" in
brain circuits. Jaan Aru et al. propose that "consciousness is heavily
influenced by, or possibly even synonymous with, the functional inte-
gration of two streams of cortical and subcortical information that
impinge on different compartments of cortical layer 5 pyramidal (L5p)
cells" (Aru, 2023). The biophysical properties of pyramidal cells "allow
them to act as gates that control the evolution of global actiatation
patterns," such that "In conscious states, this cellular mechanism enables
complex sustained dynamics withn the thalamocortical system, whereas
during unconscious states, such signal propagation is prohibiited," Aru
et al. suggest that the DIT "hallmark of conscious processing is the
flexible integration of bottom-up and top-down data streams at the
cellular level" (Aru, 2023, 2020).
21 Bach notes, “In the human brain, the functionality of the conductor is likely
facilitated via the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and
anterior insula. The conductor has attentional links into most regions” (Bach,
2019).
22 My PhD research at UCLA’s Brain Research Institute, under Professor John
Schlag, was on the thalamocortical pathway; my thesis title: “An Analysis of
Cortical Evoked Potentials and Concomitant Neuronal Population Activity.”
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
52
9.2.12. Northoff’s temporo-spatial sentience
Psychiatrist and neuroscientist Georg Northoff postulates what he
calls “sentience” as “a more basic and fundamental dimension of con-
sciousness,” and he proposes that sentience arises via “temporo-spatial
mechanisms”—characterized by brain activity, spatiotemporal rela-
tionship, and structure—with which “the brain constructs its own
spontaneous activity [that] are key for making possible the capacity to
feel, namely sentience.” Northoff’s model is based on his supposition
that “in addition to the level/state and content of consciousness, we
require a third dimension of consciousness, the form or structure or
organization of consciousness.” Thus, his “temporo-spatial theory of
consciousness” leads him to posit “specific neuro-ecological and neuro-
visceral mechanisms that are, in their most basic nature, intrinsically
temporospatial.” We have this capacity to feel and thus for sentience, he
says, “because our brain continuously integrates the different inputs
from body and environment within its own ongoing temporo-spatial
matrix” (Northoff, 2021).
Northoff distinguishes “spatiotemporal neuroscience” from cognitive
neuroscience and related branches (like affective, social, etc.) in that
spatiotemporal neuroscience focuses on brain activity (rather than brain
function), spatiotemporal relationship (rather than input-cognition-
output relationship), and structure (rather than stimuli/contents). In
this sense, spatiotemporal neuroscience “allows one to conceive the
neuro-mental relationship in dynamic spatiotemporal terms that com-
plement and extend (rather than contradict) their cognitive character-
ization” (Northoff et al., 2020).
Finally, Northoff and colleagues feel “the need to dissolve the mind-
body problem (and replace it by the world-brain relation).” They also
address other philosophical issues like assuming “time (and space) to be
constructed in different scales, small and long, with all different scales
being nested (like the different Russian dolls) within each other.” For
example, “a mental feature may be characterized by an extremely short
and restricted spatiotemporal scale which, if abstracted and thereby
detached from its underlying longer and more extended scale may seem
to be non-dynamic and thus a re-presentation of an event or object. This
is like taking one smaller Russian doll out and consider it in isolation
from all the others (and, even worse, forgetting that any of the others
were ever present).” If, in contrast, they suggest, “one conceives the
spatiotemporal scale of mental features in the larger context of other
spatiotemporal scales, one can take into view their nestedness.” In this
view, Northoff has mental features as “nothing but a small Russian doll
that is nested within the longer and more extended scales of the brain’s
spontaneous activity (which, by itself, is nested within the yet much
larger spatiotemporal scales of body and world)” (Northoff et al., 2020).
9.2.13. Bunge’s emergent materialism
Philosopher and physicist Mario Bunge rejects any “separate mental
entity,” calling it “a stumbling block to progress.” It is “unwarranted by
the available data and the existing psychological models,” he says, and it
collides “head-on with the most fundamental ideas of all modern sci-
ence.” Rather, Bunge argues that the mind-body problem requires a
psychobiological approach, based on the assumption that behavior is an
external manifestation of neural processes—an approach that also
abandons ordinary language in favor of a “state space language, which is
mathematically precise and is shared by science and scientific philoso-
phy” (Bunge, 1980; 2014). More broadly, he presents a systematic
model of mankind as a “biopsychosocial entity” and he favors “the
multilevel approach” over “the holistic, the analytic, and the synthetic
approaches” (Bunge, 1989).
Upfront, Bunge defines his idiosyncratic position: ‘‘I am an un-
abashed monist’’—his objective is “to reunite matter and mind”—and ‘‘I
am a materialist but not a physicalist.’’ By the latter distinction, Bunge
means that while the material world is all there is (i.e., there are no
nonmaterial substances), the laws of physics cannot explain all phe-
nomena (i.e., “physics can explain neither life nor mind nor society”)
(Bunge, 2011; Slezak, 2011).
Bunge calls his theory, or more precisely, his “programmatic hy-
pothesis,” about the mind-body problem “emergent materialism”—his
core concept being that “mental states form a subset (albeit a very
distinguished one) of brain states (which in turn are a subset of the state
space of the whole animal).” The hypothesis is unambiguously materi-
alist, even though “biosystems, including their mental states, have
properties that are not reducible to their physical and chemical prop-
erties.” Mind, according to Bunge, “is just a collection of functions (ac-
tivities, events) of an extremely complex central nervous system.”
Mental states are distinguished from brain states broadly in that mental
states reflect only those brain states that exhibit neural plasticity,
especially learning, in contrast to brain states that are more phyloge-
netically fixed (Bunge, 1980; 2014).
Approaching the mind-body problem as a general systems theorist,
Bunge shows, in particular, “how the concept of a state space can be used
to represent the states and changes of state of a concrete thing such as
the central nervous system.” He stresses the concept of emergence—he
defines an emergent property as “a property possessed by a system but
not by its components.” He then focuses on the level where such
emergence occurs, arguing that “the mental cannot be regarded as a
level on a par with the physical or the social.” The upshot, he says, is “a
rationalist and naturalist pluralism.” While he rejects Dualism (15) as
both untestable and contradictory to science, he also rejects Eliminative
Materialism (9.1.1) and reductive materialism (9.1.7) “for ignoring the
peculiar (emergent) properties of the central nervous system.” He opts
for “emergentist materialism” as a variety of “psychoneural monism,”
but cautions that it needs detailed mechanisms, especially mathematical
ones (Bunge, 1977).
Bunge trains his delightfully acerbic guns on choice theories: com-
putationalism (“a sophisticated version of behaviorism,” “brainless
cognitive science”); studying higher level mental phenomena rather
than neuroscience and ‘‘objective brain facts’’ (“Cartesian mind-body
dualism,” “psychoneural dualism”); philosophical zombies (‘‘respon-
sible people do not mistake conceptual possibility, or conceivability, for
factual possibility or lawfulness; and they do not regard the ability to
invent fantasy worlds as evidence for their real existence’’); and pan-
psychism (‘‘illustrates the cynical principle that, given an arbitrary
extravagance, there is at least one philosopher capable of inventing an
even more outrageous one’’) (Slezak, 2011; Bunge, 2011).
Bunge also criticizes that “the division of scientific labor has reached
such a ridiculous extreme that many workers in neuroscience and psy-
chology tend to pay only lip service to the importance of studies in
development and evolution for the understanding of their subject.” Such
neglect of development and evolution, he says, has had at least three
undesirable consequences: 1) overlooking the biological maturation of
the central nervous system (e.g., the corpus callosum takes up to a
decade to develop); 2) exaggerating leaps at the expense of graduality
(particularly of the information-processing variety); and conversely, 3)
exaggerating continuity at the expense of quantitative novelty (animal
psychologists who claim that human mental abilities differ only in de-
gree from prehuman ones) (Bunge, 1989).
In sum, to explain behavior and mentation in scientific terms, Bunge
calls for a synthesis or merger of neuroscience and social science, rather
than for a reduction, “even though the behavioral and mental processes
are neurophysiological.” Put philosophically, “this is a case of ontolog-
ical reduction without full epistemological reduction” (Bunge, 1989).
9.2.14. Hirstein’s mindmelding
William Hirstein argues that it is “the assumption of privacy”—the
deep, metaphysical impossibility for one person to ever experience the
conscious states of another—that has led philosophers and scientists to
claim wrongly that the conscious mind can never be explained in
straightforwardly physical terms and thus to “create vexing dualisms,
panpsychisms, views that would force changes in our current theories in
physics, views that deny the reality of consciousness, or views that claim
the problem is insoluble.” Hirstein seeks to undermine “the assumption
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
53
of privacy” by the thought experiment of “mindmelding”: connecting
one person’s cerebral cortex control network to another person’s cere-
bral cortex visual attention network. This would entail inter-brain rather
than the normal intra-brain coupling. Then the first person might
correctly say, “Wow, I am experiencing your conscious visual states. Did
you know you are color blind?” The control network functions as a
referent for “I”—the subject of the visual states—and the other person’s
conscious visual states are the referent for “your conscious visual states.”
As such, mindmelding would support phenomenal consciousness as
entirely physical, realizable in terms of neurobiology, which would be
both necessary and sufficient (Hirstein, 2012).
9.3. Electromagnetic field theories
Electromagnetic (EM) Field Theories treat minds as identical to, or
derivative from, the broader, brain-spanning EM fields generated by the
cumulative aggregate of multiple, specific neural currents. The brain is
packed with an intricate three-dimensional web of these EM fields—the
question is what functions do these EM fields serve (if any), and whether
these fields in any way relate to consciousness?
Diverse studies are said to support an EM field theory. For example,
“transient periods of synchronization of oscillating neuronal discharges
in the frequency range 30–80 Hz (gamma oscillations) have been pro-
posed to act as an integrative mechanism that may bring a widely
distributed set of neurons together into a coherent ensemble that un-
derlies a cognitive act.” Transitions between the moment of perception
and the motor response are marked by periods of strong desynchroni-
zation, which suggests “a process of active uncoupling of the underlying
neural ensembles that is necessary to proceed from one cognitive state to
another” (Rodriguez, 1999).
The stability of working memory is said to emerge at the level of the
electric fields that arise from neural activity, more than from the specific
neural activity itself, as “the exact neurons maintaining a given memory
(the neural ensemble) change from trial to trial.” In the face of this
“representational drift,” electric fields carry information about working
memory content, enable information transfer between brain areas and
“can act as ‘guard rails’ that funnel higher dimensional variable neural
activity along stable lower dimensional routes” (Pinotsis and Miller,
2022).
Electric fields, applied externally, have been shown to modulate
pharmacologically evoked neural network activity in rodent hippo-
campus and to enhance and entrain physiological neocortical neural
network activity (i.e., neocortical slow oscillation) in vitro as a model
system. Both show the neural efficacy of weak sinusoidal and natural-
istic electric fields (Fr¨ohlich and McCormick, 2010).
Neuroinformatics/EEG neuroscientists Andrew and Alexander Fin-
gelkurts formulate a framework of “Operational Architectonics (OA) of
Brain-Mind Functioning,” where “consciousness is an emergent phe-
nomenon of coherent but dynamic interaction among operations pro-
duced by multiple, relatively large, long-lived and stable, but transient
neuronal assemblies in the form of spatiotemporal patterns within the
brain’s electromagnetic field.” OA’s architectural structure is “charac-
terized by a nested hierarchy of operations of increasing complexity:
from single neurons to synchronized neuronal assemblies and further to
the operational modules of integrated neuronal assemblies.” Conscious
phenomena are “brought to existence” by the brain generating a “dy-
namic, highly structured, extracellular electromagnetic field in spatio-
temporal
domains
and
over
a
wide
frequency
range.”
Neurophysiological substrates of single operations (standing electro-
magnetic fields), produced by different neuronal assemblies, “present
different qualia or aspects of the whole object/scene/concept.” At the
same time, “the wholeness of the consciously perceived or imagined is a
result of synchronized operations (electromagnetic fields) of many
transient neuronal assemblies in the form of dynamic and ever-
increasing spatiotemporal patterns termed Operational Modules
(OM)”—where new OM configurations generate an almost infinite
number and complexity of phenomenal qualities, patterns, and objects
(Fingelkurts, 2024; Fingelkurts et. al., 2019, 2020).
Adding credence to electromagnetic field theories are recent dis-
coveries of large-scale, cerebral cortex-wide interacting spiral wave
patterns of brain waves that are said to underlie complex brain dynamics
and are related to cognitive processing. That the human brain exhibits
rich and complex electromagnetic patterns, with brain spirals propa-
gating across the cortex and giving rise to spatiotemporal activity dy-
namics with non-stationary features and having functional correlates to
cognitive processing, would be consistent with their role in conscious-
ness (Xu et al., 2023).
9.3.1. Jones’s electromagnetic fields
Philosopher Mostyn Jones gathers, explains and classifies various
electromagnetic-field theories, each with its own theoretical foundation:
computationalist, reductionist, dualist, realist, interactionist, epi-
phenomenalist, globalist, and localist. He uses three questions to classify
the field theories: 1. How do minds exist relative to fields? 2. Are minds
unified by global or local fields? 3. How extensively do fields and neu-
rons interact? (Jones, 2013).
The claim is made that electromagnetic fields in the brain can solve
the “binding problem,” where distinct sensory modules combine to give
a unified sense of phenomenal experience—say, melding the red and
roundness of a balloon into a single percept. For example, there doesn’t
seem to be a single synthesizing brain area into which all visual circuits
feed, nor any well-known cortical circuits that bind (unite) color and
shape to form unified images. However, perceptual binding does seem to
involve the synchronized firing of circuits in unified lockstep (with a
temporal binding code) for specific sensory modalities (e.g., shape), but
neurons in color and shape circuits don’t synchronize. Mostyn states that
“while binding involves synchrony, binding seems to be more than
synchrony,” thus giving field theories the opening to unify visual
experience via a single field, not by a single brain area or by synchrony
(yet synchrony does amplify field activity) (Jones, 2013).
Mostyn claims that evidence is mounting that unified neural elec-
tromagnetic fields interact with neuronal cells and circuits to explain
correlations and divergences between synchrony, attention, conver-
gence, and unified minds, and that the simplest explanation for the unity
of minds and fields is that minds are fields (Jones, 2017). Moreover,
some electromagnetic-field theorists even put qualia itself on the
explanatory agenda (Jones, 2013).
Jones poses “neuroelectrical panpsychism” (NP) as “a clear, simple,
testable mind–body solution” based on the conjunction of its two
component theories: (i) “everything is at least minimally conscious,” and
(ii) “electrical activity across separate neurons creates a unified, intel-
ligent mind.” According to Jones, NP is bolstered by neuroelectrical
activities that generate different qualia, unite them to form perceptions
and emotions, and help guide brain operations. He claims, ambitiously,
that “NP also addresses the hard problem of why minds accompany
these neural correlates.” He offers the radical identity that “the real
nature of matter-energy (beyond how it appears to sense organs) is
consciousness that occupies space, exerts forces, and unites neuro-
electrically to form minds.” He also has NP solving panpsychism’s
combination problem “by explaining how the mind’s subject and ex-
periences arise by electrically combining simple experiences in brains”
(Jones, 2024).
9.3.2. Pockett’s conscious and non-conscious patterns
Psychologist Susan Pockett’s electromagnetic field theory of con-
sciousness proposes that “while conscious experiences are identical with
certain electromagnetic patterns generated by the brain” have always
been acknowledged, it is critical to “specify what might distinguish
conscious patterns from non-conscious patterns … the 3D shape of
electromagnetic fields that are conscious, as opposed to those that are
not conscious.” She calls this “a testable hypothesis about the charac-
teristics of conscious as opposed to non-conscious fields” (Pockett,
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
54
2012).
Moreover, Pockett argues that the central dogma of cognitive psy-
chology that “consciousness is a process, not a thing” is “simply wrong.”
All neural processing is unconscious, she asserts. “The illusion that some
of it is conscious results largely from a failure to separate consciousness
per se from a number of unconscious processes that normally accom-
pany it—most particularly focal attention. Conscious sensory experi-
ences are not processes at all. They are things: specifically, spatial
electromagnetic (EM) patterns, which are presently generated only by
ongoing unconscious processing at certain times and places in the
mammalian brain, but which in principle could be generated by hard-
ware rather than wetware” (Pockett, 2017).
9.3.3. McFadden’s conscious electromagnetic information theory
Molecular geneticist Johnjoe McFadden proposes conscious elec-
tromagnetic information (CEMI) field theory as an explanation of con-
sciousness. His central claim is that “conventional theories of
consciousness (ToCs) that assume the substrate of consciousness is the
brain’s neuronal matter fail to account for fundamental features of
consciousness, such as the binding problem,” and he posits that the
substrate of consciousness is best accounted by the brain’s well-known
electromagnetic (EM) field (McFadden, 2023).
Electromagnetic field theories of consciousness (EMF-ToCs) were
first proposed in the early 2000s primarily to account for the experi-
mental discovery that synchronous neuronal firing was a strong neural
correlate of consciousness (NCC) (McFadden, 2002). While McFadden
has EMF-ToCs gaining increasing support, he recognizes that “they
remain controversial and are often ignored by neurobiologists and
philosophers and passed over in most published reviews of conscious-
ness.” In his own review, McFadden examines EMF-ToCs against
established criteria for distinguishing between competing ToCs and ar-
gues that “they [EMF-ToCs] outperform all conventional ToCs and
provide novel insights into the nature of consciousness as well as a
feasible route toward building artificial consciousnesses” (McFadden,
2023).
McFadden references the neurophysiology of working memory in
support of CEMI theory. He states that “although the exact neurons (the
neural ensemble) maintaining a given memory in working memory
varies from trial to trial, what is known as representational drift, sta-
bility of working memory emerges at the level of the brain’s electric
fields as detected by EEG.” This means, he argues that “since working
memory is considered to be, essentially, conscious memory,” con-
sciousness “resides in the brain’s electromagnetic fields rather than in its
neurons, acting as the brain’s global workspace.” He asserts that “the
higher level of correlation between the contents of working memory and
the brain’s EM fields, rather than the state of the brain’s matter-based
neurons, is a considerable challenge to all neural-ToCs” (McFadden,
2023).
McFadden positions CEMI field theory (or EMF-ToCs) as providing
“an objective criterion for distinguishing conscious from non-conscious
EM fields. This arises from the requirement that, to be reportably
conscious, a system must be able to generate (rather than merely
transmit)
thoughts
as
gestalt
(integrated)
information—our
thoughts—that can be communicated to the outside world via a motor
system” (McFadden, 2023).
In distinguishing CEMI field theory from Integrated Information
Theory (12), McFadden argues that “nearly all examples of so-called
‘integrated information’, including neuronal information processing
and conventional computing, are only temporally integrated in the sense
that outputs are correlated with multiple inputs: the information inte-
gration is implemented in time, rather than space, and thereby cannot
correspond to physically integrated information.” He stresses that “only
energy fields are capable of integrating information in space” and he
defines CEMI field theory whereby “consciousness is physically inte-
grated, and causally active, [with] information encoded in the brain’s
global electromagnetic (EM) field.” Moreover, he posits that
“consciousness implements algorithms in space, rather than time, within
the brain’s EM field,” and he describes CEMI field theory as “a scientific
dualism that is rooted in the difference between matter and energy,
rather than matter and spirit” (McFadden, 2020).
9.3.4. Ephaptic coupling
An ephaptic coupling theory of consciousness leverages the idea that
neurons, being electrogenic, produce electric fields, which, if suffi-
ciently strong and precisely placed, can influence the electrical excit-
ability of neighboring neurons near-instantaneously (Chen, 2020).
Assuming that ephaptic coupling occurs broadly in the brain, it could
support, or even help constitute, an electromagnetic field theory of
consciousness.
Experiments show that a neural network can generate “sustained
self-propagating waves by ephaptic coupling, suggesting a novel prop-
agation mechanism for neural activity under normal physiological
conditions.” There is clear evidence that “slow periodic activity in the
longitudinal hippocampal slice can propagate without chemical synap-
tic transmission or gap junctions, but can generate electric fields which
in turn activate neighboring cells.” These results “support the hypothesis
that endogenous electric fields, previously thought to be too small to
trigger neural activity, play a significant role in the self-propagation of
slow periodic activity in the hippocampus” (Chiang et al, 2019).
Ephaptic coupling of cortical neurons, independent of synapses, has
been demonstrated by stimulating and recording from rat cortical py-
ramidal neurons in slices. Results showed that extracellular fields,
despite their small size, “could strongly entrain action potentials,
particularly for slow (<8 Hz) fluctuations of the extracellular field,”
indicating that “endogenous brain activity can causally affect neural
function through field effects under physiological conditions” (Anas-
tassiou et al., 2011).
Mesoscopic ephaptic activity in the human brain has been explored,
including its trajectory during aging, in a sample of 401 realistic human
brain models from healthy subjects aged 16–83. “Results reveal that
ephaptic coupling … significantly decreases with age, with higher
involvement of sensorimotor regions and medial brain structures. This
study suggests that by providing the means for fast and direct interaction
between neurons, ephaptic modulation may contribute to the
complexity of human function for cognition and behavior” (Ruffini
et al., 2020).
9.3.5. Ambron’s local field potentials and electromagnetic waves
Biologist and pain researcher Richard Ambron suggests that under-
standing the specific consciousness of pain might help to understand the
mechanism of consciousness in general. Pain is ideal for studying con-
sciousness, he says, because it receives priority over all other sensations,
reflecting its criticality for survival (Ambron, 2023a, 2023b; Ambron
and Sinav, 2022).
Pain starts at the site of injury where damaged cells release small
molecular compounds that bind to the terminals of peripheral neurons
and trigger action potentials which encode information about the injury.
The greater the severity of the injury, the greater the number and fre-
quency of action potentials, and the greater the intensity of pain.
The pain pathway is well documented: from periphery to spinal cord
to the thalamus, where we first become aware of the injury but do not
feel the affect of onerous pain. Rather, the region for feeling the hurt-
fulness of pain is the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), where input from
the thalamus activates a complex neuronal circuit. Essential are the
pyramidal neurons, which have a triangular cell body and a long
dendrite with many branches that are vital for experiencing pain.
Because information transmitted between neurons must traverse the
minuscule space between them—the synapse—axons from thalamic
neurons transmit to dendrites of ACC neurons by releasing a neuro-
transmitter that traverses the gap, binds to the dendritic endings and
triggers action potentials. When there is prolonged activity at the syn-
apse in response to a serious injury, the synapses become
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
55
“hyperresponsive” and strengthened. This strengthening, called long-
term potentiation (LTP), sensitizes the synapse so that it takes fewer
action potentials to cause pain. This is why even a gentle touch to the site
of an injury will hurt (Ambron, 2023a, 2023b; Ambron and Sinav,
2022).
In addition to housing circuits for pain, the ACC receives information
from other brain regions. For example, inputs from the amygdala can
increase the intensity of the pain due to anxiety or fear, whereas those
from the nucleus accumbens can reduce the pain if the reward for
bearing the pain is considered worthwhile. Thus, what we experience as
pain depends on interactions among several areas of the brain.
To maintain electro-neutrality after an injury, there is an efflux of
positive ions from the cell body that forms a local field potential (LFP)
and creates electromagnetic (EM) waves in the extracellular space
around the pyramidal neurons. In Ambron’s novel move, he posits that
these EM waves now contain the information about the pain that was
previously encoded in the action potentials. In other words, the pain
information was transferred from action potentials to LFPs to EM waves,
which could influence nearby circuits, such as those for attention.
Ambron speculates that these EM waves contribute to consciousness.
Assuming information from other senses is also transformed into EM
waves, it also might help solve the “binding/combination problem,”
because integrating information from all the waves could explain how
individual sensory inputs combine to create “a unified, coherent version
of the world.” Unlike most theories of consciousness, Ambron believes
his hypothesis can be tested (Ambron, 2023a, 2023b).
9.3.6. Llinas’s mindness state of oscillations
Neuroscientist Rodolfo Llinas’s theory of the “mindness state” is
centered on the concept of oscillations. Many neurons possess electrical
activity, manifested as oscillating variations in the minute voltages
across the cell membrane. On the crests of these oscillations occur larger
electrical events that are the basis for neuron-to-neuron communication.
Like cicadas chirping in unison, a group of neurons oscillating in phase
can resonate with a distant group of neurons. This simultaneity of
neuronal activity, Llinas maintains, is the neurobiological root of
cognition. Although the internal state that we call the mind is guided by
the senses, it is also generated by the oscillations within the brain. Thus,
in a certain sense, Llinas would say that reality is not all "out there," but
is a kind of virtual reality (Llinas, 2002, 2007).
9.3.7. Zhang’s long-distance light-speed telecommunications
Synaptic neuroscientist Ping Zhang suggests that “the long-time
puzzle between brain and mind” might be solved by “a light-speed
telecommunication between remote cells that are arranged in paral-
lel.” He bases his theory on “the law of synchronization,” where “all the
individuals are connected to each other rigidly (or in a light-speed
momentum network), energy radiated from one individual will be
propagated to and conserved in all other individuals in light speed”
(Zhang, 2019).23
In explaining “how a ‘school’ of neurons in human brain behaves like
a light-speed rigid network and concentrates on a task,” Zhang cites his
own observation of “the traveling electrical field mediated transmission
of action potentials between excitable cells with the cell-cell distance
more than 10 mm (an anatomically astronomical distance in cortex).”
Moreover, “when longitudinal cells are arranged in parallel separately,
the action potential generated from one cell can ‘jump’ to other cells and
cause all the cells to fire action potentials in concert. If two cells fire
action potentials spontaneously and have their own rhythm, they tend to
‘learn’ from each other, adjust their own pace, eventually lock their
phases, and ‘remember’ this common rhythm for a long while” (Zhang,
2019).
Zhang notes, “unlike synaptic neuronal network, which is a physio-
logical transmission with the velocity of 0.2–120 m/s (synaptic delay
period is not included), traveling electrical field mediated transmission
… [has] the velocity of light speed.” In a cortical circuit, he says, “the
synaptic elements provide delicate and precise connections; while the
traveling electrical field, may provide transient, rapid, flexible rather
than fixed connections to synchronize rhythmic action potentials fired
from axons which are arranged in parallel and are well insulated by
dielectric media.”
How does “this invisible ‘tele’ bridge-linked synchronization or
harmony” work? According to Zhang, neural action potentials in human
brain circuits produce clusters of traveling electrical fields. Those with
similar frequency tend to be synchronized. Integration, imagination,
remembering, creating, etc. require considerable energy, and if these
processes are simply synchronizations between different brain regions,
the energy conserving property of sync facilitates performing these
mental activities.
Having worked on synaptic transmission for 20 years, Zhang muses:
“Glutamate receptors, for instance, are found in both human and cray-
fish synapses. Human receptors are not any ‘smarter’ than those of
crayfish.” It would be very narrow minded, he says, “to study human
synapses, which evolved from those of squid and crayfish, hoping to find
a magic thinking molecule.” If there is no super-highway (light speed)
above the traditional synaptic networks, he concludes, “I just cannot
imagine how people can be an intelligent life-form” (Zhang, 2019).
9.4. Computational and Informational Theories
Computation and Information Theories feature advanced computa-
tional structures, resonance systems, complex adaptive systems,
information-theory models, and mathematical models, all of which are
held, in whole or in part, as theories of consciousness.
9.4.1. Computational theories
Computational theories of mind developed organically as the pro-
cessing power of computers expanded exponentially to enable the
emulation of mind-like capabilities such as memory, knowledge struc-
ture, perception, decision-making, problem solving, reasoning and lin-
guistic comprehension (especially with the advent of human-like large
language models like ChatGPT). The growing field of cognitive science
owes its development to computational theories (Rescorla, 2020).
There is a reciprocal, recursive, positive-feedback relationship as
computational theories of mind seek both to enhance the power and
scope of computing and to advance understanding of how the human
mind actually works. Classical computational theories of mind, which
exemplify functionalism (9.1.3), are based on algorithms, which are
routines of systematic, step-by-step instructions, and on Turing ma-
chines, which are abstract models of idealized computers with unlimited
memory and time that process one operation at a time (with super-fast
but not unlimited speed).
Artificial intelligence adds logic, seeking to automate reason-
ing—deductive at first, then inductive and higher-order forms. Neural
networks, with a connectionism construct, were a step-function
advance. For example, chess computers have reigned supreme since
1997 when Deep Blue defeated the world chess champion, Gary Kas-
parov. But whereas the process has been literally massive brute-force
calculations—hundreds of millions of “nodes” per second (a “node” is
a chess position with its evaluation and history)—recent advances in
algorithmic theory are dramatically improving capabilities. The impli-
cations go way beyond chess and are apparent.
Philosopher-futurist Nick Bostrom espouses a computational theory
of consciousness, which is consistent with his view that there is a distinct
possibility that our world and universe, our total state of affairs, is a
23 Zhang adds, “Energy radiated from all individuals [in a synchronized sys-
tem] will be fed back to each individual at exactly the same time. Energy states
of all individuals tend to even up; entropy increase tends to be maximal when
sync is established; one’s energy output is another’s energy input. The system
tends to be energy conservatively beneficial and stable” (Zhang, 2019).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
56
computer simulation (Bostrom, 2003, 2006). The logic is almost a tau-
tology: A computer simulation would require, by definition, that our
consciousness, and the consciousnesses of all sentient creatures, would
be, ipso facto, computational consciousness. Of course, Bostrom does not
argue that we are living in a simulation, so his computationalism as a
theory of consciousness is motivated by other factors, including
computational neuroscience. In fact, one could make the case that the
arrow of causal explanation points in the reverse direction: Conscious-
ness as computational would need to be a condition precedent, neces-
sary but not sufficient, for the simulation argument to be coherent.
Computer/AI scientist James Reggia explains that efforts to create
computational models of consciousness have been driven by two main
motivations: “to develop a better scientific understanding of the nature
of human/animal consciousness and to produce machines that genu-
inely exhibit conscious awareness.” He offers three conclusions: “(1)
computational modeling has become an effective and accepted meth-
odology for the scientific study of consciousness; (2) existing computa-
tional models have successfully captured a number of neurobiological,
cognitive, and behavioral correlates of conscious information processing
as machine simulations; and (3) no existing approach to artificial con-
sciousness has presented a compelling demonstration of phenomenal
machine consciousness, or even clear evidence that artificial phenom-
enal consciousness will eventually be possible” (Reggia, 2013).
Computer scientist Kenneth Steiglitz argues that all available the-
ories of consciousness “aren’t up to the job” in that “they don’t tell me
how I can know whether a particular candidate is or is not phenomenally
conscious.” Moreover, he says, we will never be able to answer the
question of AI consciousness—because “it is simply not possible to test
for consciousness.” This presents, Steiglitz worries, dangers of two kinds:
(1) damaging or even destroying our own consciousness, and (2)
bringing about new consciousness that will not be treated with proper
respect and quite possible suffer (Steiglitz, 2024).
Steiglitz states three principles of what we think we know about
consciousness—the dual nature of mind and body, the dependence of
mind on body, and the dependence of mind on computation—and he
calls them all absurd, because “these do not follow from physics, biology,
or logic.” He muses, “I wish I had a theory to account for conscious-
ness—but I don’t see how any theory could” (Steiglitz, 2024).
Philosophy-savvy attorney Andrew Hartford proposes an EP (Eternal
Past) Conjecture such that “If there ever is something there always was
something, because no-thing comes from Nothing,” and that “the always
existor exists before all time, process or computation.” What follows, he
says, is that while “it remains to be seen whether artificial consciousness
is in the domain of all possibilities, we should not presume that we will
necessarily build computational consciousness” (Hartford, 2014).
The mildly dismissive critique is that the computational theory of
mind follows the historical trend of analogizing the mind to “the science
of the day,”.24
9.4.2. Grossberg’s adaptive resonance theory
To computational neuroscientist Stephen Grossberg, "all conscious
states are resonant states." The conscious brain is the resonant brain
where attentive consciousness regulates actions that interact with
learning, recognition, and prediction (Grossberg, 2019). Grossberg’s
idea is that the mind is an activity, not a thing, a verb not a noun—it’s
what you do, not what you have or use. His theoretical foundation is
“Adaptive Resonance Theory” (ART), a cognitive and neural concept of
how the brain autonomously learns to consciously attend, learn, cate-
gorize, recognize, and predict objects and events in a changing world
(Grossberg, 2013). Central to ART’s predictive power is its ability to
carry out fast, incremental, and stable unsupervised and supervised
learning in response to external events.
ART specifies mechanistic links in advanced brains that connect
processes regulating conscious attention, seeing, and knowing, with
those regulating looking and reaching. Consciousness thus enables
learning, expectation, attention, resonance, and synchrony during both
unsupervised and supervised learning. These mechanistic links arise
from basic properties of brain design principles such as complementary
computing, hierarchical resolution of uncertainty, and adaptive reso-
nance. These principles, recursively, require conscious states to mark
perceptual and cognitive representations that are complete, context
sensitive, and stable enough to control effective actions (Grossberg,
2019).
Foundational to Grossberg’s way of thinking is the idea that all
biological processes, notably our brains, self-organize, and that all
cellular systems illustrate variations of a universal developmental code.
All these processes are regulated using physically different instantiations
of mechanistically similar laws of short-term memory or activation, and
long-term memory or learned memory, that are conserved across spe-
cies, including in our brains (Grossberg, 2021).
Resonance in the brain comes about via bottom-up patterns inter-
acting with learned top-down expectations, leading to a persistent
resonant state that can also lead to conscious awareness when it includes
feature-selective cells that represent qualia. In this way, Grossberg uses
ART to explain many mind and brain data about how humans
consciously see, hear, feel, and know things (Grossberg, 2023).
At the risk of oversimplification, Grossberg’s unified theory of mind
has three “laws” of consciousness: (i) All conscious states are resonant
states; (ii) only resonant states with feature-based representations can
become conscious; (iii) multiple resonant states can resonate together.
He believes that the varieties of brain resonances and the conscious
experiences that they support make progress towards solving the hard
problem of consciousness (Grossberg, 2017).
9.4.3. Complex adaptive systems models
A complex adaptive system (CAS) is a dynamic network of in-
teractions whose collective behavior may not be predictable from its
component behaviors and that can “adapt” or alter its individual and
collective behavior, creating novelties. A CAS works, broadly, via kinds
of mutation and self-organizing principles related to change-initiating
events at different levels of its organizational structure (from micro to
collective), motivated in a loose sense by kinds of rules or trophisms
(Complex Adaptive System, 2023).
The application of CAS to consciousness can be argued from two
perspectives. First, because the brain is a classic CAS in that it is the most
complex system in the known universe—the brain has roughly (order of
magnitude) 100 billion neurons and one quadrillion (1015) con-
nections—with constant adaptations and emergences of novel functions
or activities, and because consciousness is the output of the brain,
therefore consciousness is a CAS.
Second, characteristics of consciousness per se are characteristics of a
CAS: interactions are non-linear and chaotic in that small changes in
inputs can cause large changes in outputs (e.g., minor physical or psy-
chological stimuli can trigger major behavioral responses); histories are
relevant for current and future evolution of the system; thresholds are
critical for initiating new actions; interactions can be recursive and
unpredictable; and the system is open such that boundaries may not be
definable (Rose, 2022).
Understanding consciousness as an intelligent CAS may affect how
we assess its impact on its environment; for example, how anthropology
conceives of culture (Laughlin, 2023). Consciousness may be modeled as
an intelligent CAS where intelligence means solving problems by
mediating between sensory input and behavioral output. Evolution of an
intelligent CAS is said to result in emergent properties.
24 Closer To Truth videos on Computational Theory of Mind, including Rodney
Brooks, Andy Clark, Donald Hoffman, Susan Greenfield, Peter Tse, Anirban
Bandyopadhyay,
Ken
Mogi—https://closertotruth.com/video/broro-003/?
referrer=8107.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
57
9.4.4. Critical brain hypothesis
According to biophysicist John Beggs, the Critical Brain Hypothesis
“suggests that neural networks do their best work when connections are
not too weak or too strong.” This intermediate “critical” case avoids “the
pitfalls of being excessively damped or amplified.” In criticality, the
brain capacity for transmitting more bits of information is enhanced
(Beggs, 2023).
The hypothesis posits that the brain operates optimally near the
critical point of phase transitions, oscillating between subcritical, crit-
ical, and modestly supercritical conditions. “The brain is always tee-
tering between two phases, or modes, of activity,” Beggs explains; “a
random phase, where it is mostly inactive, and an ordered phase, where
it is overactive and on the verge of a seizure.” The hypothesis predicts,
he says, that “between these phases, at a sweet spot known as the critical
point, the brain has a perfect balance of variety and structure and can
produce the most complex and information-rich activity patterns. This
state allows the brain to optimize multiple information processing tasks,
from carrying out computations to transmitting and storing information,
all at the same time” (Beggs, 2023).
The Critical Brain Hypothesis traces its origin to physicist Per Bak,
who suggests that “the brain exhibits ‘self-organized criticality,’ tuning
to its critical point automatically. Its exquisitely ordered complexity and
thinking ability arise spontaneously … from the disordered electrical
activity of neurons.” Founding his ideas on statistical mechanics, Bak
hypothesizes that, “like a sandpile, the network balances at its critical
point, with electrical activity following a power law. So when a neuron
fires, this can trigger an ‘avalanche’ of firing by connected neurons, and
smaller avalanches occur more frequently than larger ones” (Ouellette,
2018).
The same sense of a critical brain being “just right,” Beggs says, also
explains why information storage, which is driven by the activation of
groups of neurons called assemblies, can be optimized. “In a subcritical
network, the connections are so weak that very few neurons are coupled
together, so only a few small assemblies can form. In a supercritical
network, the connections are so strong that almost all neurons are
coupled together, which allows only one large assembly. In a critical
network, the connections are strong enough for many moderately sized
groups of neurons to couple, yet weak enough to prevent them from all
coalescing into one giant assembly. This balance leads to the largest
number of stable assemblies, maximizing information storage” (Beggs,
2023).
Beggs claims that “experiments both on isolated networks of neurons
and in intact brains have upheld many of these predictions” derived
from networks operating near the critical point, especially in the cortex
of different species, including humans. For example, it is possible to
disrupt the critical point. “When humans are sleep deprived, their brains
become supercritical, although a good night’s sleep can move them back
toward the critical point.” It thus appears, he suggests, that “brains
naturally incline themselves to operate near the critical point, perhaps
just as the body keeps blood pressure, temperature and heart rate in a
healthy range despite changes to the environment” (Beggs, 2023).
Two challenges are identified: (i) how is criticality maintained or
“fine-tuned” in a biological environment (Ouellette, 2018), and (ii)
“distinguishing between the apparent criticality of random noise and the
true criticality of collective interactions among neurons” (Beggs, 2023).
9.4.5. Pribram’s holonomic brain theory
Neurosurgeon/neuroscientist Karl Pribram’s Holonomic Brain The-
ory is the novel idea that human consciousness comes about via quan-
tum effects in or between brain cells such that the brain acts as a
holographic storage network (building on theories of holograms
formulated by Dennis Gabor). (“Holonomic” refers to representations in
a Hilbert phase space defined by both spectral and space-time co-
ordinates.) (Section: Holonomic brain theory, 2023).
Holograms are three-dimensional images encoded on two-
dimensional surfaces and Pribram’s claim is that this counterintuitive
capacity is fundamental in explaining consciousness. (There is precedent
in that the holographic principle in quantum cosmology describes black
hole entropy and information, with applications in string theory and
quantum gravity [Holographic principle, 2024].)
Holograms are generated from patterns of interference produced by
superimposed wavefronts, created by split beams of coherent radiation
(i.e., lasers) that are recorded and later re-constructed. A prime char-
acteristic is that every part of the stored information is distributed over
the entire hologram. Even if most parts of the hologram are damaged, as
long as any part of the hologram is large enough to contain the inter-
ference pattern, that part can recreate the entirety of the stored image
(but if the image is too small it will be noisy, blurry)
The application of holographic models to consciousness was inspired
by this non-locality of information storage within the hologram. It was
Karl Pribram who first noted the similarities between an optical holo-
gram and memory storage in the human brain, extrapolating what
psychologist Karl Lashley had discovered about the wide distribution of
memory in the cerebral cortex of rats following diverse surgical lesions.
Pribram had worked with Lashley on Lashley’s engram experiments,
which sought to determine exact locations of specific memories in pri-
mate brains by making small lesions. The surprising result was that these
targeted extirpations had little effect on memory. In contrast, removing
large areas of cortex caused multiple serious deficits in memory and
cognitive function. The conclusion was a milestone in neuroscience:
Memories are not stored in a single circuit or exact location, but were
spread over the entirety of a neural network. Thus, according to Holo-
nomic Brain Theory, memories are stored in holographic-like fashion
within certain general regions, but stored non-locally within those re-
gions. This enables the brain to maintain function and memory even
after it is damaged. (This can explain why some children retain normal
intelligence when large portions of their brains—in some cases, half-
—are removed.) (Holonomic brain theory, 2023).
More fundamentally, Holonomic Brain Theory conjectures that
consciousness is formed by quantum events within or between neurons.
This early theory of quantum consciousness, which Pribram developed
initially with physicist David Bohm, combines quantum biology with
holographic storage. Pribram suggests these processes involve electric
oscillations in the brain’s fine-fibered dendritic webs, which differ from
the commonly accepted action potentials along axons and traversing
synapses. These oscillations are waves and create wave interference
patterns in which memory is encoded such that a piece of a long-term
memory is similarly distributed over a dendritic arbor. The remark-
able result is that each part of the dendritic network contains all the
information stored over the entire network—a mechanism that maps
well onto laser-generated holograms. Thus, Holonomic Brain Theory is
said to enable distinctive features of consciousness, including the fast
associative memory that connects different pieces of stored information
and the non-locality of memory storage (a specific memory is not stored
in a single location; there is no dedicated group or circuit of specific
neurons) (Holonomic brain theory, 2023).
Although Holonomic Brain Theory has not come to threaten main-
stream neuroscience, it has intriguing features that should be explored. I
don’t hold it against the theory that it has stimulated unusual and cre-
ative speculations; for example, holographic duality and the physics of
consciousness (Awret, 2022); holographic principle of mind and the
evolution of consciousness (Germine, 2018); and quantum hologram
theory of consciousness as a framework for altered states of conscious-
ness research (Valverde et al., 2022). In fact, for a theory to have a shot
at explaining consciousness, if it does not stimulate strange ideas, it
probably doesn’t have the disruptive firepower that is surely required.
For example, physicist Uziel Awret’s dual-aspect information theory
of consciousness—holographic-duality—is motivated by certain anti-
physicalist problem intuitions associated with representational content
and spatial location and attempts to provide these with a topic neutral,
consciousness-independent explanation—which, he says “is ‘hard’
enough to make a philosophical difference and yet ‘easy’ enough to be
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
58
approached scientifically.” This is achieved by, “among other things,
showing that it is possible to conceive of physical scenarios that protect
physicalism from the conceivability argument without needing to
explain all the other anti-physicalist problem intuitions.” Awret argues
that “abstract algorithms are not enough to solve this problem and that a
more radical ‘computation’ that is inspired by physics and that can be
realized in ‘strange metals’ may be needed” (Awret, 2022).
9.4.6. Doyle’s experience recorder and reproducer
“Information Philosopher” Bob Doyle proposes the “Experience
Recorder and Reproducer (ERR)” as an information model for the mind.
He says that the mind, like software, is immaterial information, a human
being “is not a machine, the brain is not a computer, and the mind is not
processing digital information.” His proposal is that “a minimal primitive
mind would need only to ‘play back’ past experiences that resemble any
part of current experience, because “remembering past experiences has
obvious relevance (survival value) for an organism.” However, beyond
its survival value, “the ERR evokes the epistemological ‘meaning’ of
information perceived in that it may be found in the past experiences
that are reproduced by the ERR, when stimulated by a new perception
that resembles past experiences in some way” (Section: Doyle, n.d.b).
Without prior similar experience, new perceptions will be "mean-
ingless." A conscious being is constantly recording information about its
perceptions of the external world and most importantly for ERR, it is
simultaneously recording its feelings. Experiential data such as sights,
sounds, smells, tastes, and tactile sensations are recorded in a sequence
in association with emotional states, such as pleasure and pain, fear and
comfort levels, etc. This means that when the experiences are repro-
duced (played back in a temporal sequence), the accompanying emo-
tions are once again felt, in synchronization. The capability of
reproducing experiences is critical to learning from past experiences, so
as to make them guides for action in future experiences.
The ERR biological model has information stored in “neurons that
have been wired together.” (Neuroscientist Donald Hebb said that
"neurons that fire together wire together.”) The stored information does
not get recalled or retrieved (as computers do) to create a representation
that can be viewed. Doyle prefers to call the reproduction a “re-pre-
sentation” in that the ERR is simply presenting or “re-presenting" the
original experience in all parts of the conscious mind connected by the
neural assembly. Humans are conscious of our experiences because they
are recorded in (and reproduced on demand from) the information
structures in our brains. Mental information houses the content of an
individual (Doyle, n.d.b).
ERR, Doyle says, also solves the "binding problem,” the unification of
experience, because the sensory components are bound together when
initially stored in the ERR (together with the accompanying emotion).
They remain bound on playback. “They do not have to be assembled
together by an algorithmic scheme.”
Consciousness, Doyle says, can be defined in information terms as a
property of an entity (usually a living thing but can also include com-
puters and artificial intelligence) that reacts appropriately to the infor-
mation (and particularly to changes in the information) in its
environment. In the context of information philosophy, Doyle posits that
the Experience Recorder and Reproducer can provide us with “infor-
mation consciousness.”
The treatment of information is said to link the physical and the
phenomenal. Wherever there is a phenomenal state, it realizes an in-
formation state, which is also realized in the cognitive system of the
brain. Conversely, for at least some physically realized information
spaces, whenever an information state in that space is realized physi-
cally, it is also realized phenomenally. This leads Doyle to suppose that
“this double life of information spaces corresponds to a duality at a deep
level.” He even suggests that this “double realization” of information is
the key to the fundamental connection between physical processes and
conscious experience. If so, Doyle concludes, we might develop a truly
fundamental theory of consciousness. And it may just be that
information itself is fundamental (Doyle, n.d.b).
9.4.7. Informational realism and emergent information theory
Philosopher/theologian/mathematician William Dembski argues
that “informational realism,” understood properly, can “dissolve the
mind-body problem.” Information realism “asserts that the ability to
exchange information is the defining feature of reality, of what it means,
at the most fundamental level, for any entity to be real.” It does not deny,
he says, the existence of things (i.e., entities or substances). Rather, it
defines things as “their capacity for communicating or exchanging in-
formation with other things,” such that “things make their reality felt by
communicating or exchanging information.” This means that informa-
tion is “the relational glue that holds reality together” and “thus assumes
primacy in informational realism” (Dembski, 2021, 2023).
A key move in dissolving the mind-body problem, according to
Dembski, is to substitute information for perception under an informa-
tional realism framework, thereby giving the mind direct access to
fundamental properties (9.8.10). Moreover, he says, informational re-
alism is “able to preserve a common-sense realism that idealism has
always struggled to preserve” because all things simply communicate
information to their “immediate surroundings, which then ramifies
through the whole of reality, reality being an informationally connected
whole” (Dembski, 2021, 2023).
Engineering professor Jaime Cardenas-Garcia links consciousness
with “infoautopoiesis” (i.e., the process of self-production of informa-
tion) and seeks to “demystify” both. Infoautopoiesis, he says, “allows a
human organism-in-its-environment to uncover the bountifulness of
matter and/or energy as expressions of their environmental spatial/
temporal motion/change, i.e., as information or Batesonian differences
which make a difference.” Thus, “individuated, internal, inaccessible,
semantic information is the essence of consciousness,” and neither self-
produced information nor consciousness is “a fundamental quantity of
the Universe” (Cardenas-Garcia, 2023).
Independent researcher Daniel Boyd presents Emergent Information
Theory (EIT) to bridge the mind-body gap by considering biological and
technological information systems as a possible mechanism of “non-
material mind” (as defined in an informational context) influencing the
physical body. EIT uses the term “information” as exemplified by com-
puter binary “values.” While associated with a physical state (e.g., a
magnetic polarity) they are distinct from it. The system design allows the
“value” to be deduced from the state. However, being not composed of
matter or energy the value itself, as defined, cannot interact with or be
detected by any device. Yet it is these values that underlie the com-
puter’s function. EIT proposes that brain function is based on compa-
rable primitive information associated with neuronal states (Boyd,
2020).
These basic units of information are of no use individually. In com-
puters they are combined to form hierarchical levels of organ-
ization—bytes, subroutines and programs—which cannot be observed,
but can be deduced using the coding systems used to create them. Each
level has properties that do not exist in underlying levels: the “emer-
gence” referred to in EIT. Brain functions are based on equivalent hi-
erarchical, emergent phenomena which are equally non-detectable. This
applies not just to consciousness, but to all functional brain phenomena.
That, in an organic system, this generic approach can result in the
remarkable properties of consciousness should come as no surprise.
Based on the top-down causation that is common in strongly emergent
systems, EIT provides a mechanism for the influence of non-material
mind over the physical body (Boyd, 2020).
9.4.8. Mathematical theories
Mathematics can apply to consciousness in two ways. The first
approach involves methods, models and simulations that are increas-
ingly rigorous and sophisticated, describing and explaining essential
features and mechanisms of conscious experience, primarily its struc-
ture, level, content and dynamics (Labh, 2024). Here mathematics
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
59
supports various headline theories. Integrated Information Theory (12)
relies on a mathematical determination of consciousness. Friston’s
Free-Energy Principle formalizes and optimizes the representational
capacities of physical/brain systems (9.5.4). Hoffman’s Conscious Re-
alism (Idealism) utilizes a mathematical formulation of consciousness
(16.5).
The second approach posits deep claims that mathematical struc-
tures form the foundations of consciousness, much as mathematical
structures form the foundations of quantum mechanics. In a sense, the
first way, clear and common, is epistemological; the second, highly
speculative, is ontological.
As for mathematics as ontology, Max Tegmark has the entire uni-
verse, all reality, as a fundamental mathematical structure (Tegmark,
2014a). Roger Penrose has the Platonic world of perfect forms as pri-
mary such that physical and mental worlds are its “shadows.” We
“perceive mathematical truths directly,” Penrose says, in that “whenever
the mind perceives a mathematical idea, it makes contact with Plato’s
world of mathematical concepts” (Penrose, 1996). Both visions,
certainly controversial, would be consistent with mathematical con-
structions of consciousness, suggesting that consciousness is “made of’
mathematics.
Initiatives to link the abstract formal entities of mathematics, on the
one hand, and the concreta of conscious experience, on the other hand,
have proliferated, the challenge being to “represent conscious experi-
ence in terms of mathematical spaces and structures.” But what is “a
mathematical structure of conscious experience?” (Kleiner and Ludwig,
2023).
Mathematicians Johannes Kleiner and Tim Ludwig seek a general
method to identify and investigate structures of conscious experi-
ence—quality, qualia or phenomenal spaces—to perhaps serve as a
framework to unify approaches from different fields. Their prime cri-
terion is that for a mathematical structure to be literally of conscious
experience, rather than merely a tool to describe conscious experience,
“there must be something in conscious experience that corresponds to
that structure.” In simple terms, they say, such a mathematical structure
consists of two building blocks: the first brings in one or more sets called
the ‘domains’ of the structure, where the elements of sets correspond to
aspects of conscious experiences. The second are relations or functions
which are defined on the domains. The authors claim that this definition
does not rely on any specific conception or aspects of conscious expe-
rience. Rather, it can work with any theory of consciousness in that
“every conscious experience comes with a set of aspects,” whether ho-
listic, irreducible approaches to qualia and phenomenal properties, or
theories built on atomistic conceptions of consciousness such as multiple
mind modules (Kleiner and Ludwig, 2023).
Mathematician Yucong Duan proposes a mathematically based “bug”
theory of consciousness in that, with respect to consciousness, a bug is
“not only a limitation in information processing, but also an illusion that
leads human beings to create abstract and complete semantics and use
them as tools” (Duan and Gong, 2024a). He calls mathematics as “the
language of consciousness,” required to find patterns, periodicity, rele-
vance and other characteristics in consciousness, to reveal causal re-
lationships and interactions among them, and to understand the
structure, dynamics and functions of consciousness.” For example,
“dynamic system theory can describe the evolution track and stable state
of consciousness, and information theory can quantify the information
flow and entropy value in consciousness, thus revealing the dynamic
characteristics and information processing mechanism of conscious-
ness.” Moreover, Fourier transform can “decompose complex con-
sciousness signals into simple frequency components and reveal the laws
and mechanisms of consciousness activities through frequency domain
analysis, filtering and time-frequency analysis”—combining to yield
“new perspectives of consciousness regularities.” Duan does recognize
the limitations of mathematics (Duan and Gong, 2024b).
9.5. Homeostatic and affective theories
Homeostatic and Affective Theories stress predictive, homeostatic,
free-energy (active inference), equilibrium, and emotion-related the-
ories, and have become increasingly recognized as important theories of
consciousness.
9.5.1. Predictive theories (Top-down)
Top-down predictive theories highlight brain-based, central-to-pe-
ripheral, efferent influence on sensory organs more than peripheral-to-
central, afferent sensory perceptions—and while top-down predictive
models may or may not be themselves explanations of consciousness,
they give insight into the nature of consciousness and its evolutionary
development. Top-down is a fundamental principle of how brains work
and it would be surprising if it were not relevant for understanding
consciousness.
According to Anil Seth and Tim Bayne, there are two general ap-
proaches to understanding consciousness via the centrality of top-down
signaling in shaping and enabling conscious perception. The first is
reentry theories where recurrent, reentrant pathways are in some sense
conscious perceptions—and thus reentry theories are theories of con-
sciousness per se. The second approach, broadly described as predictive
processing, starts instead from a foundation principle of how the brain
works—in terms of prediction as a core principle underlying perception,
action, and cognition, and therefore does not directly specify theories of
consciousness. Nonetheless, the “core claim of reentry theory and pre-
dictive processing (PP) is that conscious mental states are associated
with top-down signaling (reentry, thick arrows) that, for PP, convey
predictions about the causes of sensory signals (thin arrows signify
bottom-up prediction errors), so that continuous minimization of pre-
diction errors implements an approximation to Bayesian inference”
(Seth and Bayne, 2022).
Cognitive philosopher Andy Clark puts it succinctly: Rather than
your brain perceiving reality passively, your brain actively predicts it.
Your brain is a powerful, dynamic prediction engine, mediating our
experience of both body and world. From the most mundane experiences
to the most sublime, reality as we know it is the complex synthesis of
predictive expectation and sensory information, “sculpting” all human
experience. Thus, the extraordinary explanatory power of the predictive
brain (Clark, 2023).
Leveraging the work of Karl Friston (9.5.4), Clark states that in
predictive processing, perception is structured around prediction, which
he suggests is the fundamental operating principle of the brain (Musser,
2023a,b). While the rudimentary evolutionary driver of the predictive
brain is simply survival, staying alive, the emergence of consciousness
can be seen as facilitating the predictive capabilities in terms of
awareness, responsiveness, and conformity to external realities.
Clark stresses that even though biological brains are increasingly cast
as “prediction machines” this should not constrain us “to embrace a
brain-bound ‘neurocentric’ vision of the mind.” The mind, such views
mistakenly suggest, consists entirely of the skull-bound activity of the
predictive brain, an inference from predictive brains to skull-bound
minds that Clark rejects. Predictive brains, he argues, can be apt par-
ticipants in larger cognitive circuits. The path is thus cleared for a new
synthesis in which predictive brains act as entry-points for extended
minds (9.7.1), and embodiment and action contribute constitutively to
knowing contact with the world (Clark, 2017a; 2017b.)
Cognitive psychologist Richard Gregory pioneered conceptualizing
the brain as actively shaping perception, not the assumed inert recep-
tacle of sensory signals. (Gregory himself credited Herman von Helm-
holtz for realizing that “perception is not just a passive acceptance of
stimuli, but an active process involving memory and other internal
processes.”) Gregory’s key insight was that “the process whereby the
brain puts together a coherent view of the outside world is analogous to
the way in which the sciences build up their picture of the world, by a
kind of hypothetico-deductive process.” Although timescales differ,
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
60
Gregory advocated the guiding principle that perception shares pro-
cesses with the scientific method. In particular, Gregory incorporated
“explicitly Bayesian concepts” into our understanding of how sensory
data is combined with pre-existing beliefs ("priors") to modify and mold
perceptions. Consciousness evolved, according to Gregory, to enable
rapid comparisons between real-world events and counterfactual sim-
ulations in order to make optimum decisions (Gregory, 2023).
Neuroscientist Rudolfo Llinas traces the evolution of the "mindness
state" to enable predictive interactions between mobile creatures and
their environment, arguing that the nervous system evolved to allow
active movement in animals. Because a creature must anticipate the
outcome of each movement on the basis of incoming sensory data, the
capacity to predict is most likely the ultimate brain function. Llinas even
suggests that Self is the centralization of prediction (Llinas, 2002).
9.5.2. Seth’s “beast machine” theory
Neuroscientist Anil Seth extends top-down predictive theories with
his neuroscience-informed “beast machine” theory that conscious ex-
periences can be understood as forms of brain-based perceptual pre-
diction, within the general framework of predictive processing accounts
of brain perception, cognition, and action. More specifically, his theory
proposes that phenomenological properties of conscious experiences can
be explained by computational aspects of different forms of perceptual
prediction. A key instance of this is in the ability to account for differ-
ences between experiences of the world and experiences of the self. The
theory also proposes that the predictive machinery underlying con-
sciousness arose via a fundamental biological imperative to regulate
bodily physiology, namely, to stay alive. We experience the world
around us, and ourselves within it, with, through, and because of our
living bodies (Seth, 2021a, 2021b).
Seth says that our conscious experiences of the world and the self are
forms of brain-based prediction—which he labels “controlled halluci-
nations.”25 He asks, how does the brain transform what are inherently
ambiguous, electrical sensory signals into a coherent perceptual world
full of objects, people, and places? The key idea is that the brain is a
“prediction machine,” and that what we see, hear, and feel is nothing
more than the brain’s “best guess” of the causes of its sensory inputs.
Because perceptual experience is determined by the content of the (top-
down) predictions, and not by the (bottom-up) sensory signals, we never
experience sensory signals themselves, we only ever experience in-
terpretations of them. Thus, “what we actually perceive is a top-down,
inside-out neuronal fantasy that is reined in by reality, not a trans-
parent window onto whatever that reality may be.” Taking this idea
seriously and seeking its implications, Seth proposes that the contents of
consciousness are a kind of waking dream—the “controlled hallucina-
tion”—that is both more than and less than whatever the real world
really is. He offers slyly the insight that “you could even say that we’re
all hallucinating all the time. It’s just that when we agree about our
hallucinations, that’s what we call reality” (Seth, 2021a, 2021b).
9.5.3. Damasio’s homeostatic feelings and emergence of consciousness
Neuroscientist Antonio Damasio’s perspective on consciousness is
distinctive in a variety of ways. Crucially, the root process behind con-
sciousness, he argues, is that of feelings related to the interior of complex
organisms endowed with nervous systems. These feelings, which Dam-
asio calls “homeostatic” to distinguish them from the feelings of emo-
tions, continuously represents the ongoing state of the life of an
organism in terms of how close or how far that state is from ideal, that
ideal being homeostasis (Damasio and Damasio, 2023, 2024; Damasio,
1999).
Neuroanatomically, the homeostatic feeling representations are
achieved by the interoceptive system which collects signals—via inter-
oceptive axons in peripheral nerves and spinal and brainstem nucle-
i—from the entire spectrum of viscera, from smooth musculature to end
organs. Interoception is distinct from exteroception in a number of ways,
but quite importantly because it pertains to an internal, animated
landscape. Feelings represent evolving, active states but the “descri-
ber”—the nervous system—happens to be located inside the organism
being “described”, with the consequence that the describer and
described can interact. Moreover, the interaction is facilitated by the fact
that the interoceptive nervous system is especially open, given its
primitive nature, which includes neurons without myelin, whose axons
are open to receiving signals at any point in their course, away from
synapses (Damasio and Damasio, 2023, 2024).
Other reasons why homeostatic feelings are distinct, according to
Damasio, include (1) the fact that they are naturally, spontaneously,
informative; and (2) that the information they provide is used to adjust
the life process such that it may best correspond to ideal conditions. In
brief, homeostatic feelings are regulatory because their spontaneous
consciousness is used to achieve homeostasis and guarantee the
continuation of life.
Homeostatic feelings are the natural source of experiences. When they
are combined with images generated by exteroceptive channels such as
vision, they produce subjectivity.
Thus, according to Damasio, homeostatic feelings are the core phe-
nomena of consciousness. They are spontaneously conscious processes of
hybrid nature, combining mental features and bodily features. Their
presence informs the rest of the mind, e.g., the images that correspond to
current perceptions or to perceptions retrieved from memory, that (1)
life is ongoing inside a specific body/organism, and that (2) the life
process is (or is not) operating within a range conducive to the contin-
uation of life. Feelings offer spontaneous guidance on this specific issue
and are thus a key to life regulation and survival (Damasio and Damasio,
2023, 2024).
Damasio recounts that “the approach to the nature and physiology of
consciousness has taken two distinct paths. One of those paths, by far the
most frequent, has tied consciousness to cognitive processes, mainly
exteroception, and most prominently, to vision. The other path has
related consciousness to affective processes, specifically to feeling. ‘The
cognitive path’ has seen consciousness as a complex and late arrival in
biological history. It culminates in cognition writ large, e.g. exterocep-
tive processes, memory, reasoning, symbolic languages, and creativity.
The ‘affect path’ has located the emergence of consciousness far earlier
in biological history, and interoceptive processes provide the key”
(Damasio and Damasio, 2021b, 2023, 2024; Damasio, 2019).
In making his argument, Damasio explains “how and why con-
sciousness entered biology through the avenue of affect. The feelings
that translate fundamental homeostatic states—hunger, thirst, malaise,
pain, well-being, desire—offer organisms a new layer of life regulation
because of their inherent conscious status. Consciousness spontaneously
delivers valuable knowledge into the decision-making mental space.
Consciousness allows organisms to act deliberately and knowingly,
rather than acting or failing to act, automatically and blindly. Con-
sciousness is what makes deliberate life regulation possible. The
intrinsic conscious nature of feelings is their grace and was their pass-
port into natural selection. Their conscious nature is not a neutral trait.”
Damasio assumes that “the emergence of consciousness occurred when
homeostatic feelings first arose, there and then, and naturally provided
knowledge concerning life” (Damasio, 2019, 2021a; Damasio, 2019).
9.5.4. Friston’s free-energy principle and active inference
Theoretical neuroscientist Karl Friston conceptualizes consciousness
as the natural outcome of his “free-energy principle for action and
perception (active inference),” which stresses the primacy of minimizing
in all organisms the difference between perceptual expectations
(required for homeostasis) and real-time sensory inputs (Friston et al,
2017). In this mechanism, human brains seek to minimize the
25 Seth first heard the phrase “controlled hallucination” from British psy-
chologist Chris Frith and traced it back to a seminar given in the 1990s by
Ramesh Jain (Seth, 2021a).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
61
difference—reduce the “surprise,” as it were—by generating internal
models that predict the external world.
As a physicist and psychiatrist, Friston says: “I find it difficult to
engage with conversations about consciousness. My biggest gripe is that
the philosophers and cognitive scientists who tend to pose the questions
often assume that the mind is a thing, whose existence can be identified
by the attributes it has or the purposes it fulfills.” The deeper question,
he asks, is “what sorts of processes give rise to the notion (or illusion)
that something exists?” Thus, Friston treats consciousness “as a process
to be understood, not as a thing to be defined.” Simply put, his argument
is that “consciousness is nothing more and nothing less than a natural
process such as evolution or the weather” (Friston, 2017).
Friston’s perspective on process leads him to “an elegant, if rather
deflationary, story about why the mind exists.” It focuses on “inference,”
which Friston characterizes as “actually quite close to a theory of
everything—including evolution, consciousness, and life itself.” We are
processes and processes can only reason towards what is “out there”
based on “sparse samples of the world; ” hence, the criticality of infer-
ence. This view, Friston says, “dissolves familiar dialectics between
mind and matter, self and world, and representationalism (we depict
reality as it is) and emergentism (reality comes into being through our
abductive encounters with the world)” (Friston, 2017).
But how did inert matter ever begin the processes that led to con-
sciousness? It starts with complex systems that are self-organizing
because they possess “attractors,” which are “cycles of mutually rein-
forcing states that allow processes to achieve a point of stability, not by
losing energy until they stop, but through what’s known as dynamic
equilibrium. An intuitive example is homeostasis ….” (Friston, 2017).
It’s at this point that Friston focuses on inference, “the process of
figuring out the best principle or hypothesis that explains the observed
states of that system we call ‘the world.’” Every time you have a new
experience, he says, “you engage in some kind of inference to try to fit
what’s happening into a familiar pattern, or to revise your internal states
so as to take account of this new fact.”
That’s why attractors are so crucial, he stresses, “because an
attracting state has a low surprise and high evidence.” A failure to
minimize surprise means “the system will decay into surprising, unfa-
miliar states” – which would threaten its existence. “Attractors are the
product of processes engaging in inference to summon themselves into
being,” he says. “In other words, attractors are the foundation of what it
means to be alive” (Friston, 2017).
Friston applies the same thinking to consciousness and suggests that
consciousness must also be a process of inference. “Conscious processing
is about inferring the causes of sensory states, and thereby navigating
the world to elude surprises … This sort of internalization of the causal
structure of the world ‘out there’ reflects the fact that to predict one’s
own states you must have an internal model of how such sensations are
generated” (Friston, 2017).
Learning as well as inference, Friston continues, relies on minimizing
the brain’s free energy. “Cortical responses can be seen as the brain’s
attempt to minimize the free energy induced by a stimulus and thereby
encode the most likely cause of that stimulus. Similarly, learning
emerges from changes in synaptic efficacy that minimize the free energy,
averaged over all stimuli encountered” (Friston, 2005).
In short, consciousness is the evolved mechanism for simulating
scenarios of the world. It is the internal emergent model that monitors
and minimizes the free energy principle, the difference between internal
perceptual expectations and real-time sensory input that reflects the
external world. Friston proposes that “the mind comes into being when
self-evidencing has a temporal thickness or counterfactual depth, which
grounds the inferences it can make about the consequences of future
actions.” Consciousness, he contends, “is nothing grander than inference
about my future” (Friston, 2017).
Friston’s consciousness as active inference leads to its metaphysical
stamp as “Markovian monism,” which, he says, rests upon the infor-
mation geometry induced in any system whose internal states can be
distinguished from external states—such that “the (intrinsic) informa-
tion geometry of the probabilistic evolution of internal states and a
separate (extrinsic) information geometry of probabilistic beliefs about
external states that are parameterized by internal states.” Friston calls
these information geometries intrinsic (i.e., mechanical, or state-based)
and extrinsic (i.e., Markovian, or belief-based). He suggests the mathe-
matics may help frame the origins of consciousness (Friston et al., 2020).
Several theories of consciousness build on the free-energy paradigm,
including Solms’s Affect (9.5.5), Carhart-Harris’s Entropic Brain (9.5.6)
and Projective Consciousness Model (9.5.11).
9.5.5. Solms’s affect as the hidden spring of consciousness
Neuroscientist and psychoanalyst Mark Solms applies Friston’s free
energy principle to the hard problem of consciousness. He identifies the
elemental form of consciousness as affect and locates its physiological
mechanism (an extended form of homeostasis) in the upper brainstem.
Free energy minimization (in unpredicted contexts) is operationalized
“where decreases and increases in expected uncertainty are felt as
pleasure and unpleasure, respectively.” He offers reasons “why such
existential imperatives feel like something to and for an organism”
(Solms, 2019).
A physicalist, Solms argues that the brain does not “produce” or
“cause” consciousness. “Formulating the relationship between the brain
and the mind in causal terms,” he says, “makes the hard problem harder
than it needs to be. The brain does not produce consciousness in the
sense that the liver produces bile, and physiological processes do not
cause—or become or turn into—mental experiences through some
curious metaphysical transformation” (Solms, 2019).
Objectivity and subjectivity are observational perspectives, he says,
not causes and effects. “Neurophysiological events can no more produce
psychological events than lightning can produce thunder. They are dual
manifestations of a single underlying process. The cause of both light-
ning and thunder is electrical discharge, the lawful action of which ex-
plains them both. Physiological and psychological phenomena must
likewise be reduced to unitary causes, not to one another. This is merely
a restatement of a well-known position on the mind–body problem: that
of dual-aspect monism”26 (Solms, 2021b). (6.)
Given the centrality of affect in Solms’ theory of consciousness, he
must argue that emotion is the most efficient mechanism, perhaps the
only effective mechanism, to optimize survival. His reasoning applies
the free energy principle (9.5.4) in neurobiology such that feelings
would uniquely enable humans to monitor interactions with unpre-
dictable environments and modify their behaviors accordingly.
Solms explains that “complex organisms have multiple needs, each of
which must be met in its own right, and, indeed, on a context-dependent
basis, they cannot be reduced to a common denominator. For example …
fear trumps sleepiness in some contexts but not in others.” So, he says,
the needs of complex organisms like ourselves must be coded as cate-
gorical variables, which are distinguished qualitatively, not quantita-
tively. Thirst feels different from sleepiness feels different from
separation distress feels different from fear, etc., such that their com-
bined optimized resolution must be computed in a context-dependent
fashion, which would lead to “excessively complex calculations,” a
“combinatorial explosion.” In terms of time spent and energy expended,
the invention of affect, emotion, feeling is a much more efficient algo-
rithm. Moreover, Solms adds, since “the needs of complex organisms
which can act differentially, in flexible ways, in variable contexts, are
‘color-coded’ or ‘flavored,’ this provides at least one mechanistic
26 Although Solms refers to “dual-aspect monism,” his ideas relate more to the
elemental properties of bodies, namely an insulating membrane (the ectoderm
of complex organisms, from which the neural plate derives) and adaptive
behavior, rather than a theory of fundamental ontology. Hence, the inclusion
here under Materialism Theories, Homeostatic and Affective, not under
Monisms.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
62
imperative for qualia” (Solms, 2021a, 2021b).
Solms seeks to demystify consciousness by showing that “cortical
functioning is accompanied by consciousness if and only if it is ‘enabled’
by the reticular activating system of the upper brainstem. Damage to just
two cubic millimeters of this primitive tissue reliably obliterates con-
sciousness as a whole.” He rejects arguments that the reticular activating
system generates only the quantitative “level” of consciousness (con-
sciousness in a waking/comatose sense) and not its qualitative “con-
tents” (consciousness as experience). This is affect, Solms says, and it is
supported by “overwhelming” evidence. Therefore, since cortical con-
sciousness is contingent upon brainstem consciousness, and since
brainstem consciousness is affective, Solms concludes that “affect is the
foundational form of consciousness. Sentient subjectivity (in its elemen-
tary form) is literally constituted by affect” (Solms, 2021a).27
Solms distinguishes between information processing models in
cognitive science, which seem to lack question-askers, and self-
organizing systems, which are obliged to ask questions—“their very
survival depends upon it. They must chronically ask: ‘What will happen
to my free energy if I do that?’ The answers they receive determine their
confidence in the current prediction.” This is why Solms states “not all
information processing (‘integrated’ or otherwise) is conscious;
sentience appears to be a property of only some information processing
systems with very specific properties, namely those systems that must
ask questions of their surrounding world in relation to their existential
needs” (Solms, 2021a)
In summary, Solms claims that the functional mechanism of con-
sciousness can be reduced to physical laws, such as Friston’s free-energy
law, among others. These laws, he says, “are no less capable of
explaining how and why proactively resisting entropy (i.e., avoiding
oblivion) feels like something to the organism, for the organism, than
other scientific laws are capable of explaining other natural things.
Consciousness is part of nature, and is mathematically tractable.”
As a corollary, with respect to Crick’s research program on the neural
correlates of consciousness, Solms declares that there can be no objects
of consciousness (e.g. visual ones) in the absence of a subject of con-
sciousness. To Solms, the subject of consciousness is literally constituted
by affect (Solms, 2021a).
Regarding AI consciousness, Solms posits that if his theory is correct,
“then, in principle, an artificially conscious self-organizing system can
be engineered.” The creation of an artificial consciousness would be, he
says, “the ultimate test of any claim to have solved the hard problem.”
But, he warns, “we must proceed with extreme caution.”
9.5.6. Carhart-Harris’s entropic brain hypothesis
Psychopharmacologist Robin Carhart-Harris proposes the Entropic
Brain Hypothesis in which the entropy of spontaneous brain activity
indexes the informational richness of conscious states (within upper and
lower limits, after which consciousness may be lost). A leading psy-
chedelic researcher, Carhart-Harris reports that the entropy of brain
activity is elevated in the psychedelic state, and there is evidence for
greater brain “criticality” under psychedelics. (“Criticality … is the
property of being poised at a ‘critical’ point in a transition zone between
order and disorder where certain phenomena such as power-law scaling
appear.”) He argues that “heightened brain criticality enables the brain
to be more sensitive to intrinsic and extrinsic perturbations which may
translate as a heightened susceptibility to ‘set’ and ‘setting.’” Measures
of brain entropy, he suggests, can inform the treatment of psychiatric
and neurological conditions such as depression and disorders of con-
sciousness (Carhart-Harris, 2018).
The “entropy” in the Entropic Brain Hypothesis is defined as “a
dimensionless quantity that is used for measuring uncertainty about the
state of a system but it can also imply physical qualities, where high
entropy is synonymous with high disorder.” Entropy is then applied in
“the context of states of consciousness and their associated neuro-
dynamics, with a particular focus on the psychedelic state … [which] is
considered an exemplar of a primitive or primary state of consciousness
that preceded the development of modern, adult, human, normal
waking consciousness.” Based on neuroimaging data with psilocybin, a
classic psychedelic drug, Carhart-Harris argues that “the defining
feature of ‘primary states’ is elevated entropy in certain aspects of brain
function, such as the repertoire of functional connectivity motifs that
form and fragment across time. Indeed, since there is a greater repertoire
of connectivity motifs in the psychedelic state than in normal waking
consciousness, this implies that primary states may exhibit ‘criticality’”
(Carhart-Harris, 2018).
Significantly, “if primary states are critical, then this suggests that
entropy is suppressed in normal waking consciousness, meaning that the
brain operates just below criticality.” This leads to the idea that “entropy
suppression furnishes normal waking consciousness with a constrained
quality and associated metacognitive functions, including reality-testing
and self-awareness.” Carhart-Harris and colleagues also propose that
“entry into primary states depends on a collapse of the normally highly
organized activity within the default-mode network” (DMN—a set of
regions more active during passive tasks than tasks requiring focused
external attention, Buckner, 2013),28 thus maintaining the brain’s ho-
meostasis and “a decoupling between the DMN and the medial temporal
lobes (which are normally significantly coupled)” (Carhart-Harris et al.,
2014).
Increased entropy in spontaneous neural activity is one of the most
notable neurophysiological signatures of psychedelics and is said to be
relevant to the psychedelic experience, mediating both acute alterations
in consciousness and long-term effects. While overall entropy increases,
entropy changes are not uniform across the brain: entropy increases in
all regions, but the larger effect is localized in visuooccipital regions. At
the whole-brain level, this reconfiguration is related closely to the to-
pological properties of the brain’s anatomical connectivity (Herzog et al
2023). (For how psychedelic experiences and mechanisms may or may
not inform theories of consciousness, see 18.21.)
Computational neuroscientist Gustavo Deco uses the concept of
equilibrium in physics to explore consciousness. Since a physical system
is in equilibrium when in its most stable state, the question is how close
to equilibrium are the electrical states of the brain while people perform
different tasks? Using a sophisticated mathematical theorem to analyze
neuroimaging data, “they found that the brain is closer to a state of
equilibrium when people are gambling than when they are cooperat-
ing,” suggesting that “there are many shades of consciousness” (Call-
aghan, 2024).
9.5.7. Buzs´aki’s neural syntax and self-caused rhythms
Neuroscientist Gy¨orgy Buzs´aki presents the brain as “a foretelling
device that interacts with its environment through action and the ex-
amination of action’s consequence,” restructuring its internal rhythms
in the process. In his telling, “our brains are initially filled with nonsense
patterns, all of which are gibberish until grounded by action-based in-
teractions. By matching these nonsense ‘words’ to the outcomes of ac-
tion, they acquire meaning.” Once brain circuits are “calibrated” or
trained by action and experience, “the brain can disengage from its
sensors and actuators, and examine ‘what happens if’ scenarios by
peeking into its own computation, a process that we refer to as cogni-
tion.” Buzs´aki stresses that “our brain is not an information-absorbing
coding device, as it is often portrayed, but a venture-seeking explorer
constantly controlling the body to test hypotheses.” Our brain does not
process information. He says, our brain “creates it” (Buzs´aki, 2019).
Buzs´aki focuses on "neural syntax", which segments neural infor-
mation and organizes it via diverse brain rhythms to generate and
27 Referencing Zeman, A. (2001.) Consciousness, Brain, 124 (Solms, 2021a).
28 It is also active during directed tasks that require participants to remember
past events or imagine upcoming events (Buckner, 2013).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
63
support cognitive functions. One expression is the “hierarchical orga-
nization of brain rhythms of different frequencies and their cross-
frequency coupling.” Buzs´aki shows that “in the absence of changing
environmental signals, cortical circuits continuously generate self-
organized cell assembly sequences”—clusters of neurons acting as
focused functional units—that are the neuronal assembly basis of
cognitive functions. He also shows “how skewed distribution of firing
rates supports robustness, sensitivity, plasticity, and stability in
neuronal networks” (Buzs´aki, Wikipedia).
Buzs´aki’s foundational idea is that “spontaneous neuron activity, far
from being mere noise, is actually the source of our cognitive abilities,”
and that “self-emerged oscillatory timing is the brain’s fundamental
organizer of neuronal information." The perpetual interactions among
these multiple network oscillators, he says, “keep cortical systems in a
highly sensitive ‘metastable’ state and provide energy-efficient syn-
chronizing mechanisms via weak links” (Buzs´aki, 2011).
Taken together, Buzs´aki coins his “inside-out” view. “The brain,” he
says, “is a self-organized system with preexisting connectivity and dy-
namics whose main job is to generate actions and to examine and predict
the consequences of those actions”. Brains draw from and interact with
the world, rather than detect it. “In other words, rather than the world
filling in the brain with information, the brain fills out the world with
action.” Flipping the brain–world relationship, Buzs´aki posits that brain
activity is fundamentally self-caused (Gomez-Marin, 2021).
Brain rhythms are Buzs´aki’s key mechanisms. “Spanning several
orders of magnitude, and organized in nested frequency bands, these
fascinating neuronal oscillations support neuronal syntax.” As Buzs´aki
puts it, “activity travels in neuronal space, much like waves in a pond.”
Cognition is merely internalized action, and it arises when the brain
disengages from the world. He thus recasts “the cognitive into the neural
by means of action as a kind of ultimate cognitive source. It is action all
the way in, all the way out, and all the way down” (Gomez-Marin, 2021).
Still, Buzs´aki must explain how endogenously produced neural syn-
tax acquires its meaning, and to do so, he reaches outside the brain.
Semantics are selected by the world, he stresses, and here’s how it
works. External inputs, sequences of perceptions that constitute wholes
or fragments of meaning, engage and modify self-organized neural
patterns so that they become meaningful and useful (broadly). Similarly,
Buzs´aki has learning as a matching process. “Existing, spontaneous
neural patterns are selected rather than constructed anew. The brain is
not a blank slate but one filled with syntactically correct gibberish that
progressively acquires meaning via the pruning of the arbitrariness that
the world affords” (Gomez-Marin, 2021).
Related, Buzs´aki and Tingley explain cognition, including memory,
“by exaptation and expansion of the circuits and algorithms serving
bodily functions.” They explain how “Regulation and protection of
metabolic and energetic processes require time-evolving brain compu-
tations enabling the organism to prepare for altered future states.” The
exaptation of such circuits, according to the authors, was likely exploi-
ted for exploration of the organism’s niche, giving rise to “a cognitive
map,” which in turn “allows for mental travel into the past (memory)
and the future (planning)” (Buzs´aki and Tingley, 2023). Moreover,
Buzs´aki’s “two-stage model of memory trace consolidation, demon-
strates how neocortex-mediated information during learning transiently
modifies hippocampal networks, followed by reactivation and consoli-
dation of these memory traces during sharp wave-ripple patterns of
sleep” (Buzs´aki, 2024).
While explaining that cognition is not the same thing as explaining
phenomenal consciousness, Buzs´aki’s theory of cognition can develop
into its own theory of consciousness. Moreover, it can help select among
other theories of consciousness, as it aligns more consistently with some
Neurobiological Theories (9.2), such as Brain Circuits and Cycles
(9.2.11); possibly Electromagnetic Field Theories (9.3); and certainly
Homeostatic and Affective Theories (9.5), especially Top-Down Pre-
dictive Theories (9.5.1).
9.5.8. Deacon’s self-organized constraint and emergence of self
Neuroanthropologist Terrence Deacon, whose research combines
human evolutionary biology and neuroscience, asserts that the origins of
life and the origins of consciousness both depend on the emergence of
self: the organizational core of both is a form of self-creating, self-sus-
taining, constraint-generating processes (Deacon, 2011a, 2011b).
Deacon characterizes consciousness as “a matter of constraint,”
focusing as much on what isn’t there as on what is. He goes beyond
complexity theory, non-linear dynamics and information theory to what
he calls "emergent dynamics" theory where constraints can become their
own causes, how constraints become capable of maintaining and pro-
ducing themselves. This, he says, is essentially what life accomplishes.
But to do this, life must persistently recreate its capacity for self-
creation. What Deacon means by self “is an intrinsic tendency to
maintain a distinctive integrity against the ravages of increasing entropy
as well as disturbances imposed by the surroundings” (Deacon, 2011a,
2011b).
The nexus to consciousness is the emergence of self: “this kind of
reciprocal, self-organizing logic (but embodied in neural signal dy-
namics) must form the core of the conscious self.” Conceiving of
neuronal processes in emergent dynamical terms, Deacon reframes as-
pects of mental life; for example, the experience of emotion relates to the
role metabolism plays in regulating the brain’s self-organizing dy-
namics, which are triggered whenever a system is perturbed away from
its equilibrium, a process that shifts availability of energy in the brain.
Thus, Deacon suggests that “conscious arousal is not located in any one
place, but constantly shifts from region to region with changes in de-
mand” (Deacon, 2011a, 2011b).
9.5.9. Pereira’s sentience
Neuroscientist Antonio Pereira, Jr. hypothesizes that cognitive con-
sciousness depends on sentience. He distinguishes “two modalities of
consciousness: sentience, in the sense of being awake and capable of
feeling (e.g., basic sensations of hunger, thirst, pain) and, second,
cognitive consciousness, i.e. thinking and elaborating on linguistic and
imagery representations.” He proposes that the physiological correlates
of sentience are “the systems underpinning the dynamic control of
biochemical homeostasis,” while the correlates of cognitive conscious-
ness are “patterns of bioelectrical activity in neural networks. His pri-
mary point is that “cognitive consciousness depends on sentience, but
not vice versa” (Pereira, 2021).
Pereira applies his concept of sentience as a theory of consciousness
to the medical sciences, especially neurology and psychiatry, for both
diagnostics and therapy. This implies that “medical practice should also
address the physiological correlates of sentience in the diagnostics and
therapy of disorders of consciousness.” The minimal requirement, he
says, “for considering a person minimally conscious is … if she can feel
basic sensations such as hunger, thirst, and pain. The capacity for feeling
is conceived as closely related to the capacity of dynamically controlling
the physiological processes of homeostasis.”
In applying theories of consciousness to medical care, Pereira posits
that higher-level capacities “such as verbal or imagery thinking, the
retrieval of episodic memories, and action planning (e.g. imagining
playing tennis, a technique for assessing residual consciousness in
vegetative states), may not be adequate as a general standard for medical
diagnosis of prolonged disorders of consciousness, since … in many
cases the person may not be able to perform these tasks but still be able
to consciously experience basic sensations” (Pereira, 2021).
Taking general anesthesia as an example, Pereira states that “if the
main criterion is not being able to feel pain, the goal of the procedure
would be broader than the loss of cognitive consciousness. In some
cases, the neural correlates of cognitive representations may not be the
main target of treatment, since they correspond to a high-level specific
ability that is not necessary for lower-level sentient experiences, which
also deserve attention for proper medical and also bioethical reasons”
(Pereira, 2021).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
64
9.5.10. Mansell’s perceptual control theory
Clinical psychologist Warren Mansell proposes Perceptual Control
Theory (PCT) in which “reorganization is the process required for the
adaptive modification of control systems in order to reduce the error in
intrinsic systems that control essential, largely physiological, variables.”
It is from this system, he says, that primary [phenomenal] consciousness
emerges and “is sustained as secondary [access] consciousness through a
number of processes including the control of the integration rate of
novel information via exploratory behavior, attention, imagination, and
by altering the mutation rate of reorganization.” Tertiary [self-
awareness] consciousness arises when “internally sustained perceptual
information is associated with specific symbols that form a parallel,
propositional system for the use of language, logic, and other symbolic
systems” (Mansell, 2022).
Mansell’s objective is to give an “integrative account of conscious-
ness,” which “should build upon a framework of nonconscious behavior
in order to explain how and why consciousness contributes to, and ad-
dresses the limitations of, nonconscious processes.” Such a theory, as
noted, “should also encompass the primary (phenomenal), secondary
(access), and tertiary (self-awareness) aspects of consciousness,” and
“address how organisms deal with multiple, unpredictable disturbances
to maintain control.” Such categories of consciousness come about, ac-
cording to PCT, because of “purposiveness,” which is “the control of
hierarchically organized perceptual variables via changes in output that
counteract disturbances which would otherwise increase error between
the current value and the reference value (goal state) of each perceptual
variable” (Mansell, 2022).
9.5.11. Projective consciousness model
The Projective Consciousness Model (PCM) is a mathematical model
of embodied consciousness that “relates phenomenology to function,
showing the computational advantages of consciousness.” It is based on
“the hypothesis that the spatial field of consciousness (FoC) is structured
by a projective geometry and under the control of a process of active
inference.” The FoC in the PCM is said to combine “multisensory evi-
dence with prior beliefs in memory” and to frame them “by selecting
points of view and perspectives according to preferences.” This “choice
of projective frames governs how expectations are transformed by
consciousness. Violations of expectation are encoded as free energy.
Free energy minimization drives perspective taking, and controls the
switch between perception, imagination and action” (Rudrauf et al,
2017).
Founding assumptions of the PCM include: consciousness as an
evolved mechanism that optimizes information integration and func-
tions as an algorithm for the maximization of resilience; relating the free
energy principle (9.5.4) to perceptual inference, active inference and
(embodied) conscious experience; an integrative predictive system
projecting a global 3-dimensional spatial geometry to multimodal sen-
sory information and memory traces as they access the conscious
workspace; and emphasis on the embodied nature of consciousness
(9.6.1), without reducing consciousness to embodiment. A pivotal idea
is that embodied systems have “an evolutionary advantage of devel-
oping an integrative cognition of space in order to represent, simulate,
appraise and control spatially distributed information and the conse-
quences of actions” (Rudrauf et al, 2017).
Much is made of “the lived body,” because “in contrast to most
contents of consciousness, the lived body is normally always present in
the conscious field … a proxy for the integrity of the actual body … an
anchor point for our efforts at preserving autonomy and well-being.”
The lived body, therefore, is “a kind of inferential representation of the
real body in physical space … a sort of virtual ‘user interface’ for the
representation and control of the actual body.”
Thus, the PCM claims to account for fundamental psychological
phenomena: the spatial phenomenology of subjective experience; the
distinctions and integral relationships between perception, imagination
and action; and the role of affective processes in intentionality. The PCM
suggests that brain states becoming conscious “reflect the action of
projective transformations” (Rudrauf et al, 2017).
9.5.12. Pepperell’s organization of energy
Artist and perceptual scientist Robert Pepperell suggests that while
energetic activity is fundamental to all physical processes and drives
biological behavior, consciousness is a specific product of the organi-
zation of energetic activity in the brain. He describes this energy, along
with forces and work, as “actualized differences of motion and tension,”
and believes that consciousness occurs “because there is something it is
like, intrinsically”—from the intrinsic perspective of the system—“to
undergo a certain organization of actualized differences in the brain”
(Pepperell, 2018).
Pepperell laments that “energy receives relatively little attention in
neuroscientific and psychological studies of consciousness. Leading
scientific theories of consciousness do not reference it, assign it only a
marginal role, or treat it as an information-theoretical quantity. If it is
discussed, it is either as a substrate underpinning higher level emergent
dynamics or as powering neural information processing.” He argues that
“the governing principle of the brain at the neural level is not infor-
mation processing but energy processing,” although the information-
theoretic approach can complement the energetic approach. Pepperell
puts “information in the biological context as best understood as a
measure of the way energetic activity is organized, that is, its complexity
or degree of differentiation and integration.” While “information theo-
retic techniques provide powerful tools for measuring, modeling, and
mapping the organization of energetic processes,” he says, “we should
not confuse the map with the territory” (Pepperell, 2018).
In comparison with mainstream brain organization frameworks at
the global level or localized, Pepperell offers, as an alternative or com-
plementary way of thinking, how the energetic activity in the brain is
organized. The challenge for the model is why energetic processing is
associated with consciousness in the brain but not in other organs, like
the liver or heart. Pepperell claims that energetic activity in the brain
efficiently actuates differences of motion and tension that make the dif-
ference, perhaps via dynamic recursive organization – the “appropriate
reentrant intracortical activity.”
“If we are to naturalize consciousness,” Pepperell concludes, "then
we must reconcile energy and the mind.” Treating the brain as a dif-
ference engine that serves “the interests of the organism is a natural
approach to understanding consciousness as a physical process” (Pep-
perell, 2018).
9.6. Embodied and enactive theories
Embodied and Enactive Theories emphasize the importance of the
body and its interaction with the environment as an integral part of what
consciousness is, not only what consciousness does. It also includes
neurophenomenology, unifying two disparate ways of studying
consciousness.
9.6.1. Embodied cognition
Embodied Cognition is the concept that what makes thought mean-
ingful are the ways neural circuits are connected to the body and
characterize embodied experience, and that abstract ideas and language
are embodied in this way as well. While cognition and consciousness are
not the same, cognitive linguist George Lakoff argues that the mind is
embodied, in that even pure mentality depends on the body’s sensori-
motor systems and emotions and cannot be comprehended without
engaging them (Lakoff, 2007, 2012).
In their classic book on the embodied mind, Philosophy in the Flesh,
Lakoff and Mark Johnson stress three points: "The mind is inherently
embodied. Thought is mostly unconscious. Abstract concepts are largely
metaphorical. Much of the subject matter of philosophy, they claim,
such as the nature of time, morality, causation, the mind, and the self,
relies heavily on basic metaphors derived from bodily experience.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
65
Thought requires a body, they assert, “not in the trivial sense that you
need a physical brain with which to think, but in the profound sense that
the very structure of our thoughts comes from the nature of the body”
(Lakoff and Johnson, 1999).
9.6.2. Enactivism
Enactivism is the way of thinking that posits to explore mental ac-
tivities, one must examine living systems interacting with their envi-
ronments. Cognition is characterized as embodied activities. A mind
without a body would be as if incoherent.
“Enaction” was the term introduced in The Embodied Mind, the 1991
book by Varela, Rosch and Thompson (Varela et al., 1991). The enactive
view is that cognition develops via dynamic, bidirectional exchanges
between an organism and its surroundings. It is not the case that an
organism seeks optimum homeostasis in a static environment, but rather
that the organism is shaping its environment, and is being shaped by its
environment—actively, iteratively, continuously—all mediated by that
organism’s sensorimotor processes. Thus, organisms are active agents in
the world who affect the world and who are affected by the world.
(Section: Hutto, 2023; Enactivism, 2024).
Enactivists would harbor no hope of understanding mentality unless
it were founded on histories of such bidirectional organism-environment
interactions because that’s the core concept of how minds arise and
work. Organisms are self-creating, self-organizing, self-adapting, self-
sustaining living creatures who regulate themselves and in doing so can
change their environments, which then, iteratively, recycles the whole
process.
The scientific consensus is that phenomenal consciousness evolved
via stages of cognition and proto-consciousness selected by fitness-
enhanced traits in challenging environments. Although focused on
cognition, enactivism enriches the consciousness-generating conditions
by adding interactive dynamism between the organism and the envi-
ronment. (Enactment is also said to be “a genuinely metaphysical idea”
and “an ontological breakthrough” in that “Something is the case if and
only if it is enacted” [Werner, 2023].)
9.6.3. Varela’s neurophenomenology
Neuroscientist and philosopher Francisco Varela proposes what he
calls “neurophenomenology,” which seeks to articulate mutual con-
straints between phenomena present in experience, inspired by the style
of inquiry of phenomenology, and the correlative field of phenomena
established by the cognitive sciences (Varela Legacy, 2023). He starts
with one of Chalmers’s basic points: first-hand experience is an irre-
ducible field of phenomena. He claims there is no “theoretical fix” or
“extra ingredient” in nature that can possibly bridge this gap. Instead,
the field of conscious phenomena require a rigorous method and an
explicit pragmatics. It is a quest, he says, to marry modern cognitive
science and a disciplined approach to human experience, thereby
placing himself in the lineage of the continental tradition of phenome-
nology (Varela, 1996).
Varela calls for gathering a research community armed with new
tools to develop a science of consciousness. He claims that no piecemeal
empirical correlates, nor purely theoretical principles, will do the job.
He advocates turning to a systematic exploration of the only link be-
tween mind and consciousness that seems both obvious and natural: the
structure of human experience itself.
Varela’s phenomenological approach starts with the irreducible na-
ture of conscious experience. Lived experience, he says, is “where we
start from and where all must link back to, like a guiding thread.” From a
phenomenological standpoint, “conscious experience is quite at vari-
ance with that of mental content as it figures in the Anglo-American
philosophy of mind.” He advocates examining, “beyond the spook of
subjectivity, the concrete possibilities of a disciplined examination of
experience that is at the very core of the phenomenological inspiration.”
He repeats: “it is the re-discovery of the primacy of human experience
and its direct, lived quality that is phenomenology’s foundational
project” (Varela, 1996).
Varela’s key point is that by emphasizing a co-determination of both
accounts—phenomenological and neurobiological—one can explore the
bridges, challenges, insights and contradictions between them. This
means that both domains have equal status in demanding full attention
and respect for their specificity. It is quite easy, he says, to see how
scientific accounts illuminate mental experience, but the reciprocal di-
rection, from experience towards science, is what is typically ignored.
What do phenomenological accounts provide? Varela asks. “At least
two main aspects of the larger picture. First, without them the firsthand
quality of experience vanishes, or it becomes a mysterious riddle. Sec-
ond, structural accounts provide constraints on empirical observations.”
He stresses that “the study of experience is not a convenient stop on our
way to a real explanation, but an active participant in its own right.” And
while phenomenal experience is at an irreducible ontological level, “it
retains its quality of immediacy because it plays a role in structural
coherence via its intuitive contents, and thus keeps alive its direct
connection to human experience, rather than pushing it into abstrac-
tion” (Varela, 1996).
This makes the whole difference, Varela argues: The “hardness” and
riddle become an open-ended research program with the structure of
human experience playing a central role in the scientific endeavor. “In
all functionalistic accounts what is missing is not the coherent nature of
the explanation but its alienation from human life. Only by putting
human life back in, will that absence be erased” (Varela, 1996). (The
common thread said to run through Varela’s extensive and heterogenous
body of work is “the act of distinction”—distinctions as processes, dis-
tinctions in ways of distinguishing—“the aim of which was to address
and supersede the challenges inherent in the dualist [modernist]
thought style, especially the infamous two-pronged problem of the
bifurcation and disenchantment of nature” [V¨or¨os, 2023].)
In the quarter century since Varela’s neurophenomenology paper
was published, its research program has made some advances and
encountered some tensions; for example, investigating the experience of
boundaries of the self, both phenomenologically and neurobiologically.
The biggest challenge remains first-person reporting and interpretation,
such as subtle aspects of self-consciousness. The continuing hope is that
neurophenomenology can inform the science of consciousness, that the
ongoing interaction between human experience and neuroscience be-
comes “an act of art, a deep listening, an improvisational dance, which
slowly develops into a skillful scientific dialogue” (Berkovich-Ohana
et al., 2020).
9.6.4. Thompson’s mind in life
Philosopher Evan Thompson heralds “the deep continuity of life and
mind.” His foundational idea is “Where there is life there is mind, and
mind in its most articulated forms belongs to life,” and his organizing
principle is “Life and mind share a core set of formal or organizational
properties, and the formal or organizational properties distinctive of
mind are an enriched version of those fundamental to life.” More pre-
cisely, he says, “the self-organizing features of mind are an enriched
version of the self-organizing features of life. The self-producing or
‘autopoietic’ organization of biological life already implies cognition,
and this incipient mind finds sentient expression in the self-organizing
dynamics of action, perception, and emotion, as well as in the self-
moving flow of time-consciousness” (Thompson, 2002; Maturana and
Varela, 1980).29
From this perspective, Thompson sees mental life as bodily life and as
situated in the world. The roots of mental life lie not simply in the brain,
he says, “but ramify through the body and environment. Our mental
29 Personal note: Evan Thompson’s father was social philosopher and cultural
critic William Irwin Thompson, who had great influence on me (RLK)—espe-
cially his books, At the Edge of History (1971) and Passages about Earth (1974).
The influence would help lay the foundation for Closer To Truth.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
66
lives involve our body and the world beyond the surface membrane of
our organism, and therefore cannot be reduced simply to brain processes
inside the head.”
With this framework, Thompson seeks to reduce (if not bridge) the
so-called “explanatory gap” between consciousness and world, mind and
brain, first-person subjectivity and third-person objectivity (i.e., the
hard problem of consciousness). He works to achieve this (to over-
simplify) by having the same kinds of processes that enable the transi-
tion from nonlife to life to enable the transition from life to mind. (I’d
think he would rather eliminate the concept of “transition” altogether
and consider life-mind as a unified concept—perhaps like, in cosmology,
the once apparent independent dimensions of space and time now uni-
fied by a single physical concept, spacetime.)
As a pioneer of enactivism (9.6.2), Thompson posits that “the enac-
tive approach offers important resources for making progress on the
explanatory gap” by explicating “selfhood and subjectivity from the
ground up by accounting for the autonomy proper to living and cogni-
tive beings.” He extends the idea with "embodied dynamism,” a key
concept that combines dynamic systems and embodied approaches to
cognition. While the former reflects enactivism, the latter is the
enhancement (Thompson, 2002).
According to Thompson, the central idea of the dynamic systems
approach is that cognition is an intrinsically temporal phenomenon
expressible in “the form of a set of evolution equations that describe how
the state of the system changes over time. The collection of all possible
states of the system corresponds to the system’s ‘state space’ or ‘phase
space,’ and the ways that the system changes state correspond to tra-
jectories in this space.” Dynamic-system explanations, he says, consist of
“the internal and external forces that shape such trajectories as they
unfold in time. Inputs are described as perturbations to the system’s
intrinsic dynamics, rather than as instructions to be followed, and in-
ternal states are described as self-organized compensations triggered by
perturbations, rather than as representations of external states of affairs”
(Thompson, 2002).
To make real progress on the explanatory gap, Thompson says, “we
need richer phenomenological accounts of the structure of experience,
and we need scientific accounts of mind and life informed by these
phenomenological accounts.” My aim, he says, “is not to close the
explanatory gap in a reductive sense, but rather to enlarge and enrich
the philosophical and scientific resources we have for addressing the
gap.”
Calling on the philosophical tradition of phenomenology, inaugu-
rated by Edmund Husserl and developed by others, primarily Maurice
Merleau-Ponty, Thompson seeks to “naturalize” phenomenology by
aligning its investigations with advances in biology and cognitive sci-
ence and to complement science and its objectification of the world by
reawakening basic experiences of the world via phenomenology. His
main move is for cognitive science “to learn from the analyses of lived
experience accomplished by phenomenologists …. which thus needs to
be recognized and cultivated as an indispensable partner to the experi-
mental sciences of mind and life” (Thompson, 2002).
The deeper convergence of the enactive approach and phenome-
nology, Thompson says, is that “both share a view of the mind as having
to constitute its objects.” He stresses that “constitute” does not mean
fabricate or create, but rather “to bring to awareness, to present, or to
disclose.” Thus, “the mind brings things to awareness; it discloses and
presents the world. Stated in a classical phenomenological way, the idea
is that objects are disclosed or made available to experience in the ways
they are thanks to the intentional activities of consciousness.” Thompson
argues that weaving together the phenomenological and neurobiolog-
ical can “bridge the gap between subjective experience and biology,
which defines the aim of neurophenomenology (9.6.4), an offshoot of
the enactive approach” (Thompson, 2002).
9.6.5. Frank/Gleiser/Thompson’s “The Blind Spot”
Astrophysicist Adam Frank, theoretical physicist Marcello Gleiser,
and philosopher Evan Thompson elevate and promote “the primacy of
consciousness” in that “There is no way to step outside consciousness
and measure it against something else. Everything we investigate,
including consciousness and its relation to the brain, resides within the
horizon of consciousness.” Lest they be misunderstood, the authors
reject any inference that “the universe, nature, or reality is essentially
consciousness or is somehow made out of consciousness,” because “this
does not logically follow.” Such “a speculative leap,” they say, goes
beyond what we can know or establish on the basis of “consciousness as
experienced from within and as an irreducible precondition of scientific
knowledge.” Furthermore, “this speculative leap runs afoul” of what
they call “the primacy of embodiment,” which “is as equally undeniable
as the primacy of consciousness” (Frank et al., 2024, pp. 186, 188).
What now confronts us, Frank/Gleiser/Thompson say, is “a strange
loop,” where “horizonal consciousness subsumes the world, including
our body experienced from within, while embodiment subsumes con-
sciousness, including awareness in its immediate intimacy.” The authors
stress that “the primacy of consciousness and the primacy of embodi-
ment enfold each other.” They call for unveiling and examining this
strange loop, which normally disappears from view and is forgotten in
what they call The Blind Spot. They describe the Blind Spot as “human-
ity’s lived experience as an inescapable part of our search for objective
truth” (Frank et al., 2024, p. 189), and they seek “to reclaim the central
place of human experience in the scientific enterprise by invoking the
image of a ‘Blind Spot’” (Gomez-Marin, 2024). In other words, they
reject the way of thinking that “we can comprehend consciousness
within the framework of reductionism, physicalism, and objectivism or,
failing that, by postulating a dualism of physical nature versus irre-
ducible consciousness that we could somehow grasp outside the strange
loop.” This is why they label the hard problem of consciousness an
“artifact of the Blind Spot.” It is “built into blind-spot metaphysics, and
not solvable in its terms” because “it fails to recognize the ineliminable
primacy of consciousness in knowledge” (Frank et al., 2024, p. 192).
Frank/Gleiser/Thompson see “only a few options for trying to deal
with consciousness within the confines of the blind-spot worldview,”
and that “ultimately, they’re all unsatisfactory, because they never come
to grips with the need to recognize the primacy of consciousness and the
strange loop in which we find ourselves.” They argue that the three
major options—neural correlates of consciousness (9.2.2); metaphysical
bifurcation of physical reality and irreducible mental properties
(whether naturalistic dualism, substance dualism or panpsychism—13,
15); and illusionism (9.1.1)—are all “within the ambit of the Blind Spot”
(Frank et al., 2024, p. 196).
What Frank/Gleiser/Thompson offer is “a radically different
approach beyond the Blind Spot.” They reference papers by astrophys-
icist Piet Hut and cognitive psychologist Roger Shepard (Hut and She-
pard, 1996), and neuroscientist Francisco Varela (1996), making the
case for “a major overhaul of the science of consciousness based on
recognizing the primacy of experience.” They note “we inescapably use
consciousness to study consciousness,” such that “unless we recover
from the amnesia of experience and restore the primacy of experience in
our conception of science, we’ll never be able to put the science of
consciousness on a proper footing.” A science of consciousness can work,
all say, only if “experience really matters” (Frank et al., 2024, p. 218).
The key, according to the authors, is “recognizing [both] the primacy
of consciousness and the primacy of embodiment,” which, they claim
“changes how we think about the problem of consciousness.” The
problem for neuroscience “can no longer be stated as how the brain
generates consciousness.” Rather, “the problem is how the brain as a
perceptual object within consciousness relates to the brain as part of the
embodied conditions for consciousness, including the perceptual expe-
rience of the brain as a scientific object. The problem is to relate the
primacy of consciousness to the primacy of embodiment without
privileging one over the other or collapsing one onto the other. The
situation is inherently reflexive and self-referential: instead of simply
regarding experience as something that arises from the brain, we also
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
67
have to regard the brain as something that arises within experience. We
are in the strange loop” (Frank et al., 2024, pp. 219–220).
Frank/Gleiser/Thompson support Varela’s neuroscience research
program, “neurophenomenology” (9.6.3), based on “braiding together
first-person accounts of consciousness with third-person accounts of the
brain within the I-and-you experiential realm.” They advocate that
phenomenology and neuroscience “become equal partners in an inves-
tigation that proceeds by creating new experiences in a new kind of
scientific workshop, the neurophenomenological laboratory. First-
person experiential methods for refining attention and awareness
(such as meditation), together with second-person qualitative methods
for interviewing individuals about the fine texture of their experience,
are used to produce new experiences, which serve as touchstones for
advancing phenomenology. This new phenomenology guides in-
vestigations of the brain, while investigations of the brain are used to
motivate and refine phenomenology in a mutually illuminating loop”
(Frank et al., 2024, pp. 219–220). The authors call neuro-
phenomenology “probably the strongest effort so far to envision a
neuroscience of consciousness beyond the Blind Spot (Frank et al., 2024,
p. 221). Consciousness, particularly human consciousness, is “an
expression of nature and is a source of nature’s self-understanding.”
9.6.6. Bitbol’s radical neurophenomenology
Philosopher of science and phenomenologist Michel Bitbol promotes
a “radical neurophenomenology” in which a “tangled dialectic of body
and consciousness” is the “metaphysical counterpart” and whose goal is
to advance Varela’s neurophenomenology project (9.6.3) of criticizing
and dissolving the “hard problem” of consciousness (Bitbol, 2021a).
Bitbol claims that the neurophenomenological approach to the “hard
problem” is underrated and often misunderstood; indeed, “in its original
version, neurophenomenology implies nothing less than a change in our
own being to dispel the mere sense that there is a problem to be theo-
retically solved or dissolved. Neurophenomenology thus turns out to be
much more radical than the enactivist kinds of dissolution” (9.6.2)
(Bitbol and Antonova, 2016).
Did Varela himself have a theory to solve the hard problem? No,
Varela declared (in Bitbol’s report) “only a ‘remedy”—the point being
that “there exists a stance (let’s call it the Varelian stance) in which the
problem of the physical origin of primary consciousness, or pure expe-
rience, does not even arise.” The implications, according to Bitbol, are
that “the nature of the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness is changed from
an intellectual puzzle to an existential option.” The “constructivist
content,” he says, is that “The role of ontological prejudice about what
the world is made of (a prejudice that determines the very form of the
‘hard problem’ as the issue of the origin of consciousness out of a pre-
existing material organization) is downplayed” (Bitbol, 2012).
Bitbol blames “the standard (physicalist) formulation of this prob-
lem” for both generating it and turning it into “a fake mystery.” But he
recognizes that dissolving the hard problem is very demanding for re-
searchers, because “it invites them to leave their position of neutral
observers/thinkers, and to seek self-transformation instead.” Bitbol’s
approach “leaves no room for the ‘hard problem’ in the field of
discourse, and rather deflects it onto the plane of attitudes.” This runs
the risk, he says, of “being either ignored or considered as a dodge”
(Bitbol, 2021a).
Bitbol’s method is “a metaphysical compensation for the anti-
metaphysical premise of the neurophenomenological dissolution of the
‘hard problem.’” This can be achieved, he says, by designing this alter-
native metaphysics “to keep the benefit of a shift from discourse to ways
of being, which is “the latent message of neurophenomenology” (Bitbol,
2021a). In its most radical version, “neurophenomenology asks re-
searchers to suspend the quest of an objective solution to the problem of
the origin of subjectivity, and clarify instead how objectification can be
obtained out of the coordination of subjective experiences. It therefore
invites researchers to develop their inquiry about subjective experience
with the same determination as their objective inquiry.” Bitbol proposes
a methodology to explore lived experience faithfully (via micro-
phenomenological interviews retrieving or “evoking past experiences”)
and thereby “addresses a set of traditional objections against intro-
spection” (Bitbol and Petitmengin, 2017).
Bitbol gives neuroscience no privilege, priority or pride of place.
“The effective primacy of lived experience should be given such prom-
inence that every other aspect, content, achievement, distortion, and
physicalist account of consciousness, is made conditional upon it.” From
a (radical) phenomenological standpoint, he says, “one must not mistake
objectivity for reality. Reality is what is given and manifest, whereas
objectivity is what is constituted by extracting structural invariants from
the given experience. Along with this phenomenological approach, an
objective science is not supposed to disclose reality as it is beyond ap-
pearances, but only to circumscribe some intersubjectively recognized
features of the appearing reality.” Having said that, Bitbol stresses that
“neuroscientific data should not be granted a higher ontological status
than phenomenological descriptions; they should not be given the power
to render a compelling verdict about what is real and what is deceptive
in our experience.” Thus, he sums up: “from a phenomenological
standpoint, the neuro-phenomenological correlation is plainly perceived
as an extension of the lived sense of embodiment, not as a sign that some
naturalistic one-directional ‘fundamental dependence’ of consciousness
on the bodily brain is taking place” (Bitbol, 2015).
Bitbol’s affirmative solution is to formulate a “dynamical and
participatory conception of the relation between body and conscious-
ness … with no concession to standard positions such as physicalist
monism and property dualism.” Bitbol’s conception is based on Varela’s
formalism of “cybernetic dialectic,” “a geometrical model of self-pro-
duction,” and it is “in close agreement with Merleau-Ponty’s ‘intra-
ontology’: an engaged ontological approach of what it is like to be,
rather than a discipline of the contemplation of beings” (Bitbol, 2021a).
Bitbol’s approach to quantum physics complements his “radical
phenomenology,” such that quantum mechanics becomes more a
"symbolism of atomic measurements,” rather than “a description of
atomic objects.” He supports the notion that “quantum laws do not ex-
press the nature of physical objects, but only the bounds of experimental
information.” Similarly, Bitbol supports QBism, where the wave func-
tion’s probabilities are said to be, shockingly (to me), Bayesian proba-
bilities, which means they relate to prior subjective degrees of belief
about the system, paralleling some ideas in phenomenology (Bitbol,
2023).
Bitbol calls out “three features of such non-interpretational, non-
committal approaches to quantum physics” that “strongly evoke the
phenomenological epistemology.” These are: “their deliberately first-
person stance; their suspension of judgment about a presumably
external domain of objects, and subsequent redirection of attention to-
wards the activity of constituting these objects; their perception-like
conception of quantum knowledge.” Moreover, Bitbol claims that
these new approaches of quantum physics go beyond phenomenological
epistemology and “also make implicit use of a phenomenological
ontology.” He cites Chris Fuch’s “participatory realism” that “formulates
a non-external variety of realism for one who is deeply immersed in
reality,” adding, “but participatory realism strongly resembles Merleau-
Ponty’s endo-ontology, which is a phenomenological ontology for one
who deeply participates in Being” (Bitbol, 2020; Gefter, 2015).
QBist theorists assert that “quantum states are ‘expectations about
experiences of pointer readings,’” rather than expectations about
pointer positions. Their focus on lived experience, not just on macro-
scopic variables, is tantamount to performing the transcendental
reduction instead of stopping at the relatively superficial layer of the
life-world reduction.” Bitbol believes that “quantum physics indeed
gives us several reasons to go the whole way down to the deepest variety
of phenomenological reduction … not only reduction to experience, or
to ‘pure consciousness,’ but also reduction to the ‘living present’” (Bit-
bol, 2021b).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
68
9.6.7. Direct perception theory
Direct Perception Theory is the idea that “the information required
for perception is external to the observer; that is, one can directly
perceive an object based on the properties of the distal stimulus alone,
unaided by inference, memories, the construction of representations, or
the influence of other cognitive processes” (APA, website). Philosopher
Ned Block describes non-mainstream views of phenomenal conscious-
ness that take it to work via this kind of “a direct awareness relation to a
peculiar entity like a sense datum [i.e., that which is immediately
available to the senses] or to objects or properties in the environment.”
This direct awareness would seem to have to be “a primitive unana-
lyzable acquaintance relation that is not a matter of representation.”
According to these direct realist or naïve realist theories of conscious-
ness, “the phenomenal character of a perceptual experience is object-
constituted in the sense that a perceptual experience of a tomato de-
pends for its existence and individuation on the tomato. Any experience
that is of a different tomato will have a different phenomenal character,
even if it is phenomenally indistinguishable and even if the different
tomato is exactly the same in all its properties and causes exactly the
same activations in the brain.” Even subjectively indistinguishable
hallucinatory experience would have to be different in phenomenal
character as well (Block, 2023).
9.6.8. Gibson’s ecological psychology
Experimental psychologist James J. Gibson proposes an “embodied,
situated, and non-representational” approach to perception (which,
while not a surrogate for phenomenal consciousness, has features in
common). Gibson attacks both behaviorism and cognitivism (e.g., in-
formation processing), arguing for direct perception and direct realism.
Gibson calls his overarching theory, “Ecological Psychology,” and while
his specific aim is “to offer a third way beyond cognitivism and behav-
iorism for understanding cognition,” an extension to consciousness can
be cautiously inferred (Lobo et al., 2018; Gibson, 2024).
Gibson maintains that there is far more information available to our
perceptual systems than we are consciously aware of. He posits that “the
optical information of an image is not so much an impression of form
and color, but rather of invariants. A fixated form of an object only
specifies certain invariants of the object, not its solid form.” Perceptual
learning is said to be “a process of seeing the differences in the
perceptual field around an individual” (Gibson, 2014, 2024).
Gibson rejects “the premise of the poverty of the stimulus, the
physicalist conception of the stimulus, and the passive character of the
perceiver of mainstream theories of perception.” Rather, he has the main
principles of ecological psychology as “the continuity of perception and
action” and the “organism-environment system as unit of analysis”
(Lobo et al., 2018).
Significantly, Gibson develops the original idea of “affordances” (he
coins the term), which are the ways the environment provides oppor-
tunities for and motivates actions of animals—human examples include
steep slopes inspiring the design of stairs and deposits of hydrocarbons
encouraging drilling. Gibson defends the radical idea that “when we
perceive an object we observe the object’s affordances and not its
particular qualities” because it is both more useful and easier, which
would mean that affordances are the objects of perception (Gibson,
2024; Lobo et al., 2018).
If perception is direct, and affordances provide the possibilities, then
affordances are a kind of state space of the mind. That environmental
affordances may have enabled or selected for consciousness would be
consistent with embodied and enactive theories of consciousness.
9.7. Relational theories
Relational Theories of consciousness are those explanations whose
distinctive feature is some kind of active or transformative connection
with something other than brain circuits and pathways themselves.
9.7.1. A. Clark’s extended mind
The extended mind, according to philosopher Andy Clark, features
an “active externalism,” based on the participatory role of the envi-
ronment in driving cognitive processes. He asserts that when the human
organism is linked with an external entity in a two-way interaction, a
“coupled system” is created that can be conceptualized as a cognitive
system in its own right (independent of the two components). This is
because all the components in the system play an active causal role, and
they jointly govern behavior in the same sort of way that cognition in a
single system (brain) usually does. To remove the external component is
to degrade the system’s behavioral competence, just as it would to
remove part of its brain. Clark’s thesis is that this sort of coupled process
counts equally well as a cognitive process, whether or not it is wholly in
the head (Clark and Chalmers, 1998).
Clark concludes his book, Supersizing the Mind, by inviting us “to
cease to unreflectively privilege the inner, the biological, and the neural
… The human mind, viewed through this special lens, emerges at the
productive interface of brain, body, and social and material world.” He
marvels that “minds like ours emerge from this colorful flux as sur-
prisingly seamless wholes” (Clark, 2010).
According to Owen Flanagan, “Walking, talking and seeing are all
things the enactive, embodied, extended (code words for this hip new
view) mind does in the world.” Clark “provides the best argument I’ve
seen for the idea that minds are smeared over more space than neuro-
science might have us believe, and that mind will continue spreading to
other nooks and crannies of the universe as cognitive prostheses pro-
liferate” (Flanagan, 2009).
9.7.2. No¨e’s “out of our heads” theory
Philosopher Alva No¨e argues that only externalism about the mind
and mental content, which requires active and continuous engagement
between the brain and its environment, body and beyond, can succeed as
a theory of consciousness (No¨e, 2010). He uses his attention-alerting
phrase “Out of Our Heads” as descriptor, not as metaphor, and he ap-
plies it literally. His hypothesis is that expanding the locus of where
consciousness occurs may help explain its essence and mechanism. What
does this actually mean?
No¨e takes issue with both dualism and materialism; attacking the
weaknesses of each is not hard going. “We have no better idea how the
actions of cells in the head give rise to consciousness than we do how
consciousness arises out of immaterial spiritual processes.” So, brain
science, he says, while it has the imprimatur of the scientific worldview,
is not really going anywhere. It’s like trying to understand what makes a
dance “a dance” by studying the movement of muscles (No¨e, 2007).
He challenges the assumption that an event in the brain is alone
sufficient for consciousness. “We spend all our lives, not as free-floating
brains; we’re embodied, we’re environmentally embedded; we’re so-
cially nurtured from the very beginnings of our lives.” His idea is that
“The world shows up for us,” with “multiple layers of meaning.”
No¨e offers an alternative framework, a novel way of thinking. “There
are lots of discrete processes going on inside the head. But that’s not
where we should look for consciousness. We occupy a place in the
world—all sorts of things are going on around us—and consciousness is
that activity of keeping tabs, keeping touch, paying attention to, inter-
acting with the world.”
But what does it mean to say consciousness “is” that activity? “Is” as
… “part of the process?” Or “enabling,” “bringing about” or “causing”?
Or, in the strong sense of “is” as identity theory?
No¨e distinguishes the meaning and purposes of consciousness, which
take place “out of our heads,” from the mechanical locus of conscious-
ness, the substrate on which its symbols are physically encoded and
manipulated.
No¨e uses dreams as corroborating evidence that consciousness occurs
outside of the brain. He distinguishes dreams from real-life experiences,
in that the latter has greater density, detail and robustness. “You can’t
experience in a dream everything that you can experience outside of a
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
69
dream” (No¨e, 2007).
Consciousness to No¨e means “How the world shows up for us de-
pends not only on our brains and nervous systems but also on our bodies,
our skills, our environment, and the way we are placed in and at home in
the world.” This does not happen automatically, passively, done to the
organism, but it is what the organism must do deliberately, proactively.
“We achieve access to the world. We enact it by enabling it to show up
for us.… If I don’t have the relevant skills of literacy, for example, the
words written on the wall do not show up for me” (No¨e, 2012).
He stresses that consciousness isn’t just a matter of events triggered
inside us by things outside us because things are triggered inside us all
the time by all sorts of things outside of us and they don’t rise to con-
sciousness. Much depends on context, interest, knowledge and
understanding.
Thus, consciousness is what happens when sentient creatures
interact with their environment via their brains; consciousness is not
what their brains are doing to them. A science of consciousness, No¨e
says, must explain the role the brain is playing in a dynamic active
involvement. It’s not just that consciousness happens in the brain; it’s
not like that. “We are not our brains” (No¨e, 2012).
9.7.3. Loorits’s structural realism
Philosopher Kristjan Loorits’s Structural Realism posits that
“conscious experiences are fully structural phenomena that reside in our
brains in the form of complex higher-order patterns in neural activity.”
He claims that the structural view of consciousness solves both the hard
problem and the problem of privacy (Loorits, 2019).
On the hard problem, according to Loorits, while some properties of
our conscious experiences seem to be qualitative and non-
structural—qualia—“these apparently nonstructural properties are, in
fact, fully structural.” He conjectures that qualia are “compositional
with internal structures that fully determine their qualitative nature”
(Loorits, 2019), that “qualia are the structures of vast networks of un-
conscious associations, and that those associational structures can be
found in our neural processes.” He makes the ambitious prediction that
“with the proper brain-stimulating technology, it should be possible to
reveal the structural nature of qualia to the experiencing subject
directly” (Loorits, 2019). Loorits concludes that “consciousness as a
whole can be seen as a complex neural pattern that misperceives some of
its own highly complex structural properties as monadic and qualitative.
Such neural pattern is analyzable in fully structural terms and thereby
the hard problem is solved (Loorits, 2014). (As for “the notion of
structure,” Loorits’s Structural Realism has some structures existing in
the world in an objective sense and has conscious experiences among
such structures [Loorits, 2019].)
On the privacy problem, according to Loorits, while our “powerful
intuition” is that “the content of my consciousness is directly accessible
only to me”—a brain-bound internalist approach to consciousness,
which comports well with neurobiological theories—some argue that
“we can only talk about phenomena whose defining properties are
known to us from the public realm.” According to this externalist
approach, “if our conscious experiences were entirely private, we could
not talk or theorize about them”—a way of thinking that suggests
“conscious experiences should be understood in terms of an organism’s
relationship to its socio-physical environment” (Loorits, 2019).
In defending internalism as the “location” of consciousness, Loorits
argues that “structural phenomena are describable and analyzable in
public terms even if those phenomena themselves are private.” More-
over, “the structure of our consciousness is always present in our neural
processes and only sometimes (additionally) in an extended system that
includes elements of the environment” (Loorits, 2018).
Loorits offers modest support to illusionists who propose that “the
apparently non-structural features of consciousness are in fact fully
structural and merely seem to be non-structural.” He argues that “such a
position is tenable, but only if the non-structural ‘seemings’ are inter-
preted as perspectival phenomena and not as theorists’ fictions or
absolute nothingness” (Loorits, 2022).
When George Musser was musing that qualia might be relational
(9.7), he met with Loorits, and to Musser’s surprise, Loorits “had gone
off the idea.” The disjunction is between third and first-person per-
spectives, where the former is how qualia is explained relationally and
the latter is precisely the hard problem. According to Musser, Loorits’s
current thinking was that “qualia may well be relational behind the
scenes, but as long as they feel intrinsic to us, they still elude scientific
description.” Loorits concluded, “There is still a hard problem in a sense
that we seem to be able to experience qualia without being aware of
their relational components” (Musser, 2023a,b). (I tip my hat when a
philosopher changes their mind.)
9.7.4. Lahav’s relativistic theory
Physicist Nir Lahav characterizes consciousness as a physical phe-
nomenon that is relative to the measurements of a "cognitive frame of
reference." Just as different observers can have different measurements
of velocity in a relativistic context, the same is true for consciousness.
Two people can have different cognitive frames of reference, experi-
encing conscious awareness for themselves but only measuring brain
activity for the other. The brain doesn’t create conscious experiences
through computations; rather, conscious experiences arise due to the
process of physical measurement. Different physical measurements in
different frames of reference manifest different physical properties, even
when measuring the same phenomenon. This leads to different mani-
festations of conscious experience and brain activity in separate cogni-
tive frames (Lahav and Neemeh, 2022).
9.7.5. Tsuchiya’s relational approach to consciousness
Neuroscientist Nao Tsuchiya’s relational approach to consciousness
is not so much a theory of consciousness per se but more a fresh meth-
odology, “an alternative approach to characterize, and eventually
define, consciousness through exhaustive descriptions of conscious-
ness’s relationships to all other consciousnesses.” His approach is
founded in category theory (i.e., mathematical structures and their re-
lations), which is used to characterize the structure of conscious phe-
nomenology as a category and describe the interrelationships of
members with mathematical precision. Tsuchiya proposes several
possible definitions of categories of consciousness, both in terms of level
and contents—the objective being for these conceptual tools to clarify
complex theoretical concepts about consciousness, which have been
long discussed by philosophers and psychologists, and for such con-
ceptual clarification to inspire further theoretical and empirical
research. To the extent that the project is successful, it will support
relational theories of consciousness (Tsuchiya and Saigo, 2021).
9.7.6. Jaworski’s hylomorphism
Philosopher William Jaworski argues that the hard problem of con-
sciousness arises only if hylomorphism is false. Hylomorphism is the
claim that structure is a basic ontological and explanatory principle, and
is responsible for individuals being the kinds of things they are, and
having the powers or capacities they have. As Jaworski explains, “A
human is not a random collection of physical materials, but an indi-
vidual composed of physical materials with a structure that accounts for
what it is and what it can do—the powers it has. What is true of humans
is true of their activities as well.” Structured activities, he says, include
perceptual experiences, which means that everything about a perceptual
experience, including its phenomenal character, can be explained by
describing the perceiver’s structure: perceptual subsystems, the powers
of those subsystems, and the coordination that unifies their activities
into the activity of the perceiver as a whole. Conscious experiences,
Jaworski concludes, “thus fit unproblematically into the natural
world—just as unproblematically as the phenomenon of life” (Jaworski,
2020).
According to Jaworski, from a hylomorphic perspective, “mind-body
problems are byproducts of a worldview that rejects structure, and
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
70
which lacks a basic principle which distinguishes the parts of the
physical universe that can think, feel, and perceive from those that can’t.
Without such a principle, the existence of those powers in the physical
world can start to look inexplicable and mysterious.” But if mental
phenomena are structural phenomena, he says, then they are part of the
physical world and thus “hylomorphism provides an elegant way of
solving mind-body problems” (Jaworski, 2016).
While hylomorphism exemplifies a suite of arguments purporting to
undermine the hard problem, its own challenge seems two-fold: (i) by
defining structure as primitive and fundamental, it almost embeds the
desired conclusion in the definitional premise; and (ii) by not dis-
tinguishing kinds of structure, all structure holds the same level of ul-
timate explanation, which may not fit consciousness.
9.7.7. Process theory
A process theory of consciousness is founded on process philosophy,
the metaphysical idea that fundamental reality is dynamic, change,
shift—the action of becoming.30 With respect to consciousness, process
philosophy has refused to bifurcate human experience from nature, and
as a consequence, process philosophy holds to a “panexperientialist”
ontology where experience goes all the way down in nature, and con-
sciousness genuinely emerges as an achievement of the evolution of
experience through time. Only in the case of God (if God exists, of
course) does consciousness belong to nature as an ontological primitive.
(Davis, 2020, 2022; Faber, 2023).
David Ray Griffin suggests that “panexperientialist physicalism,” by
allowing for “compound individuals” and thereby a “nondualistic
interactionism” that combines these strengths, can provide a theory that
overcomes the problems of materialist physicalism (Griffin, 1997).
Panexperientialist physicalism, he says, portrays the world as comprised
of creative, experiential, physical-mental events. His process-type pan-
experientialism agrees with materialism that there is only one kind of
stuff, but enlarges “energy” to “experiential creativity” (thus dis-
tinguishing it from panpsychism, 13.12). Process panexperientialists
assume that it lies in the very nature of things for events of experiential
creativity to occur—for partially self-creative experiences to arise out of
prior experiences and then to help create subsequent experiences. The
process by which our (sometimes partly conscious) experiences arise out
of those billions of events constituting our bodies at any moment is
simply the most complex example of this process—and the only one the
results of which we can witness from the inside.
9.8. Representational theories
Representational Theories of consciousness elevate the explanatory
power of mental representations, which are inner-perceived notions or
imagery of things, concrete or abstract, that are not currently being
presented to the senses. Representational theories seek to explain con-
sciousness in terms of mental representations rather than simply as
neural or brain states. Mental representations utilize cognitive symbols
that can be manipulated in myriad ways to describe, consider and
explain an endless variety of thoughts, ideas, and concepts (Mental
representation,
2024.
Wikipedia).
According
to
strict
representationalism, conscious mental states have no mental properties
other than their representational properties (Van Gulick, 2019).
According to philosopher Michael Tye, “representationalism is a
thesis about the phenomenal character of experiences, about their im-
mediate subjective ‘feel’. At a minimum, the thesis is one of super-
venience: necessarily, experiences that are alike in their representational
contents are alike in their phenomenal character. So understood, the
thesis is silent on the nature of phenomenal character. Strong or pure
representationalism goes further. It aims to tell us what phenomenal
character is.” In this view, “phenomenal character is one and the same as
representational content that meets certain further conditions” (Tye,
2002).
Philosopher Fred Dretske’s "Representational Thesis" is the claim
that: (1) All mental facts are representational facts, and (2) All repre-
sentational facts are facts about informational functions (Dretske, 2023).
Philosopher Amy Kind observes that “as philosophers of mind have
begun to rethink the sharp divide that was traditionally drawn between
the phenomenal character of an experience (what it’s like to have that
experience) and its intentional content (what it represents), represen-
tationalist theories of consciousness have become increasingly popular”
(Kind, 2010).
While almost all theories of consciousness have representational
features, the representational theories themselves, including those that
follow, are distinguished by the more robust claim that their represen-
tational features are what explain consciousness (Van Gulick, 2019). A
hurdle for all theories is the need to explain phenomenology in terms of
intentionality, the “aboutness” of mental states, under the assumption
that intentionality must be represented (Lycan, 2019).
This is Jerry Fodor’s challenge: “I suppose that sooner or later the
physicists will complete the catalog they’ve been compiling of the ulti-
mate and irreducible properties of things. When they do, the likes of
spin, charm, and charge will perhaps appear on their list. But aboutness
surely won’t; intentionality simply doesn’t go that deep” (Fodor, 1989).
9.8.1. First-order representationalism
First-order representationalism (FOR) seeks to account for con-
sciousness in terms of, or by reducing to, external, world-directed (or
first-order) intentional states (Gennaro, n.d.). In other words, con-
sciousness can be explained, primarily, by understanding how the
directedness of our mental states at objects and states of affairs in the
world is generated directly by those objects and states of affairs (Searle,
1979).
Fred Dretske asserts that “the phenomenal aspects of perceptual
experiences are one and the same as external, real-world properties that
experience represents objects as having.” He argues that “when a brain
state acquires, through natural selection, the function of carrying in-
formation, then it is a mental representation suited (with certain pro-
visos) to being a state of consciousness.” (In contrast, “representations
that get their functions through being recruited by operant conditioning,
on the other hand, are beliefs.”) (Dretske, 1997).
As philosopher Peter Carruthers explains, “the goal [of FOR] is to
characterize all of the phenomenal—‘felt’—properties of experience in
terms of the representational contents of experience (widely individu-
ated). On this view, the difference between an experience of red and an
experience of green will be explained as a difference in the properties
represented—reflective properties of surfaces, say—in each case. And
the difference between a pain and a tickle is similarly explained in
representational terms—the difference is said to reside in the different
properties (different kinds of disturbance) represented as located in
particular regions of the subject’s own body” (Carruthers, 2000).
Carruthers recounts his unusual transition from higher-order theory
to first-order theory.31 He originally explained phenomenal conscious-
ness in terms of “dispositionalist higher-order thought theory,” which he
30 I wanted to include a process philosophy approach to consciousness, but
decided it could not by itself carry a separate category, because consciousness
per se is not a central concern in process philosophy. Given that the process of
becoming implies shifting relationships between things, over time and space, I
include process philosophy here in “Relational Theories.” Considering its
advocacy of “panexperientialism,” Panpsychism was the initial option, but I
thought it could prove misleading to tie the two together metaphysically,
because the meaning of panexperientialism in process philosophy differs subtly
from its meaning in philosophy of mind broadly. So, Solomonically, I split the
baby, including Process Theory in both Relational Theories under Materialism
(9.7.7) and in Panpsychism (14.12).
31 Again, I love when a philosopher changes their mind.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
71
characterized as “a certain sort of intentional content (‘analog’, or fine-
grained), held in a special-purpose short-term memory store in such a
way as to be available to higher-order thoughts … all of those contents
are at the same time higher-order ones, acquiring a dimension of seeming
or subjectivity” (Carruthers, 2000). (One of his goals, he says, is “to
critique mysterian [10.2] and property-dualist accounts of phenomenal
consciousness … [by] defending the view that consciousness can be
reductively explained in terms of active non-conceptual representa-
tions.” He sought to “disarm (and explain away the appeal of) the
various ‘hard problem’ thought experiments (zombies, explanatory
gaps, and the rest)” (Carruthers, 2017).
The later Carruthers concludes that the earlier Carruthers had
“rejected first-order representational theories of consciousness on
inadequate grounds.” As a result, “since there is extensive evidence that
conscious experience co-occurs with the global broadcasting of first-
order non-conceptual contents in the brain [9.2.3], and since this evi-
dence is most easily accommodated by first-order representationalism,
the latter is preferable to any form of higher-order account” (Carruthers,
2017).
Philosopher Neil Mehta and anesthesiologist George Mashour
describe FOR as consisting of “sensory representations directly available
to the subject for action selection, belief formation, planning, etc.” They
posit a neuroscientific framework, according to which neural correlates
of general consciousness include prefrontal cortex, posterior parietal
cortex, and non-specific thalamic nuclei, while neural correlates of
specific consciousness include sensory cortex and specific thalamic
nuclei” (Mehta and Mashour, 2013).
FOR’s core philosophical idea, Mehta and Mashour state, is that “any
conscious state is a representation, and what it’s like to be in a conscious
state is wholly determined by the content of that representation. By
definition, a representation is about something, and the content of a
representation is what the representation is about. For instance, the
word ‘dolphins’ (representation) is about dolphins (content).” But, they
clarify, “a representation is not identical to its content.” The English
word “dolphins” has eight letters, but dolphins themselves do not have
any letters. “Conversely, dolphins swim, but the word ‘dolphins’ does
not swim.”
This distinction leads to the strong view that neural states seem to
have very different properties than conscious perceptions. “For instance,
when someone consciously perceives the color orange, normally there is
nothing orange in that person’s brain. First-order representationalists
explain this by holding that a conscious perception of orange is a rep-
resentation of orange, and (as the ‘dolphin’ example shows) the prop-
erties of a representation can be very different from the properties of its
content” (Mehta and Mashour, 2013).
FOR’s core neurobiological idea is that “each specific type of
conscious state corresponds to a specific type of neural state.” Ned Block
seeks to “disentangle the neural basis of phenomenal consciousness from
the neural machinery of the cognitive access that underlies reports of
phenomenal consciousness.” He argues that, in a certain sense,
“phenomenal consciousness overflows cognitive accessibility.” He posits
that “we can find a neural realizer of this overflow if we assume that the
neural basis of phenomenal consciousness does not include the neural
basis of cognitive accessibility and that this assumption is justified
(other things being equal) by the explanations it allows” (Block, 2007c).
Block hypothesizes that the conscious experience of motion is a
certain kind of activation of visual area V5, which suggests that sensory
systems are the neural correlates of sensory consciousness. He further
speculates that what’s required for consciousness in general are con-
nections between these cortical regions and the thalamus, “which sug-
gests that sensory and perhaps post-sensory systems … are the neural
correlates of general consciousness, as well” (Block, 2007c).
Block says he favors the first-order point of view, and if it is right, he
says, “It may be conscious phenomenology that promotes global
broadcasting, something like the reverse of what the global workspace
theory of consciousness supposes. First-order phenomenology may be a
causal factor in promoting global broadcasting; but according to the
global workspace theory, global broadcasting constitutes consciousness
rather than being caused by it” (Block, 2023, pp. 8–9).
With a pungent example, Block compares first-order representa-
tionalism with higher-order representationalism (9.8.3), higher-order
theories (HOT). “We have two perceptions that equally satisfy the
descriptive content of the HOT, but one and not the other causes the
HOT. But that gives rise to the problem of how a thought to the effect
that I am smelling vomit could make a perception of crimson a conscious
perception. The perception of crimson could cause the HOT while a
simultaneous first-order smell-representation of vomit does not cause
any higher-order state. The consequence would be that the perception of
crimson is a conscious perception and the perception of vomit is not,
even though the subject experiences the perception of crimson as if it
were the perception of vomit.” Block concludes that “a descriptivist view
based on content is inadequate,” and that “the difficulty for the HOT
theory is that it is unclear what relation has to obtain between a HOT
and a perception for the perception to be conscious” (Block, 2023, pp.
425–426).
9.8.2. Lamme’s recurrent processing theory
Neuroscientist Victor Lamme proposes Recurrent Processing Theory,
which stresses brain sensory systems that are massively interconnected
and involve feedforward and feedback connections, as being necessary
and sufficient for consciousness. The visual system provides a case
where “forward connections from primary visual area V1, the first
cortical visual area, carry information to higher-level processing areas,
and the initial registration of visual information involves a forward
sweep of processing.” Moreover, many feedback connections link visual
areas with other brain regions, which, later in processing, are activated
and thereby yield dynamic activity within the visual system (Wu, 2018).
Lamme proposes four stages of visual processing: Stage 1: Visual
signals are processed locally within the visual system (i.e., superficial
feedforward processing). Stage 2: Visual signals travel further forward in
the processing hierarchy where they can influence action (i.e., deep
feedforward processing). Stage 3: Information travels back into earlier
visual areas, leading to local recurrent processing (i.e., superficial
recurrent processing). Stage 4: Information activates widespread brain
areas (i.e., widespread recurrent processing) (Wu, 2018).
According to Lamme, it is the recurrent processing in Stage 3, which
is a first-order theory and can occur in both sensory and post-sensory
areas, that he claims to be necessary and sufficient for consciousness.
In other words, “for a visual state to be conscious is for a certain
recurrent processing state to hold of the relevant visual circuitry” (Wu,
2018).
Ned Block calls Recurrent Processing Theory “basically a truncated
form of the global workspace account: It identifies conscious perception
with the recurrent activations in the back of the head without the
requirement of broadcasting in the global workspace.” Block points out
that “first-order theories do not say that recurrent activations are by
themselves sufficient for consciousness. These activations are only suf-
ficient given background conditions. Those background conditions
probably include intact connectivity with subcortical structures.” What
then is “enough for conscious perceptual phenomenology” is “the active
recurrent loops in perceptual areas plus background conditions.” Block
concludes: “So long as high-level representations participate in those
recurrent loops, conscious high-level content is assured” (Block, 2023,
pp. 8–9).
Lamme critiques Global Workspace Theory [9.2.3] as “all about ac-
cess but not about seeing” (even though his Stage 4 is consistent with
global workspace access). The crucial distinction is that Global Work-
space Theory has recurrent processing at Stage 4 as necessary for con-
sciousness, while Recurrent Processing Theory has recurrent processing
at Stage 3 as sufficient. The latter would enable phenomenal con-
sciousness without access by the global neuronal workspace (Wu, 2018).
Overall, Lamme avers that “neural and behavioral measures should
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
72
be put on an equal footing” and that “only by moving our notion of mind
towards that of brain can progress be made” (Lamme, 2006). He depicts
“a notion of consciousness that may go against our deepest conviction:
‘My consciousness is mine, and mine alone.’ It’s not,” he says (Lamme,
2010).
9.8.3. Higher-order theories
According to Higher-Order Theories of consciousness, what makes a
perception conscious is the presence of an accompanying cognitive state
about the perception. This means that phenomenal consciousness is not
immediate awareness of sensations. Rather, it is the higher-level sensing
of those sensations, a product of second-order thoughts about first-order
perceptions or mental states—a two-level process. Higher-Order The-
ories are distinguished from other cognitive accounts of phenomenal
consciousness which assume that first-order perceptions or mental states
can themselves be directly conscious—a one-level process (9.8.1, 9.8.2)
(Carruthers, 2020, Higher-order theories of consciousness, 2023).
According to Peter Carruthers, “humans not only have first-order
non-conceptual and/or analog perceptions of states of their environ-
ments and bodies, they also have second-order non-conceptual and/or
analog perceptions of their first-order states of perception.” This higher-
order perception theory holds that “humans (and perhaps other animals)
not only have sense-organs that scan the environment/body to produce
fine-grained representations, but they also have inner senses which scan
the first-order senses (i.e. perceptual experiences) to produce equally
fine-grained, but higher-order, representations of those outputs.” Hence,
Higher-Order Theories are also called “inner-sense theory.” Notably,
“the higher-order approach does not attempt to reduce consciousness
directly to neurophysiology but rather its reduction is in mentalistic
terms, that is, by using such notions as thoughts and awareness” (Car-
denas-Garcia, 2023).
The main motivation driving higher-order theories of consciousness,
according to Carruthers, “derives from the belief that all (or at least
most) mental-state types admit of both conscious and unconscious va-
rieties … And then if we ask what makes the difference between a
conscious and an unconscious mental state, one natural answer is that
conscious states are states that we are aware of.” This translates into the
view that conscious states are states “that are the objects of some sort of
higher-order representation—whether a higher-order perception or
experience, or a higher-order thought” (Cardenas-Garcia, 2023).
Various flavors of higher-order theories can be distinguished,
including the following (Cardenas-Garcia, 2023):
Actualist Higher-Order Thought Theory (championed by David
Rosenthal): A phenomenally conscious mental state is a state that is
the object of a higher-order thought, and which causes that thought
non-inferentially.
Dispositionalist Higher-Order Thought Theory: A phenomenally
conscious mental state is a state that is available to cause (non-
inferentially) higher-order thoughts about itself (or perhaps about
any of the contents of a special-purpose, short-term memory store).
Self-Representational Theory: A phenomenally conscious mental
state is a state that, at the same time, possesses an intentional con-
tent, thereby in some sense representing itself to the person who is the
subject of that state.
According to Ned Block, there are two approaches to higher-order
thought (HOT) theories of consciousness. The “double representation”
approach says that the HOT involves a distinct coding of the perceptual
content, such that a conscious perception will be “accompanied” by a
thought of that experience, giving two representations of the conscious
experience, one perceptual, one cognitive and conceptual. He considers
it “mysterious” how a perception can be conscious. The second version
of HOT has a thought or at least a cognitive state that makes a perception
conscious but that thought does not itself have any perceptual content.
Block refers to Hakwan Lau, who sometimes describes the higher-order
state as a “pointer” to a first-order state. The pointer theory is cognitive
in that the pointer is a thought, but it is not conceptualist since it in-
volves no concept of a conscious experience involved in the thought that
is supposed to make a perception conscious (Block, 2023, pp. 425–426).
Lau himself argues that the key to characterizing consciousness lies
in its connections to belief formation and epistemic justification on a
subjective level (Lau, 2019a); he describes consciousness as “a battle
between your beliefs and perceptions” (Lau, 2019b). A clue, he sug-
gests—at least at the level of functional anatomy—is that the neural
mechanisms for conscious perception and sensory metacognition are
similar, sensory metacognition meaning the monitoring of the quality or
reliability of internal perceptual signals. Both mechanisms involve
neural activity in the prefrontal and parietal cortices, outside of primary
sensory regions (9.8.4).
Reflexive theories, which link consciousness and self-awareness, are
either a sister or a cousin of Higher-Order Theories. They differ in that
reflexive theories situate self-awareness within the conscious state itself
rather than in an independent meta-state focusing on it. The same
conscious state is both intentionally outer-directed awareness of
external perceptions and intentionally inner-directed awareness of self-
sense. A strong claim is that this makes reflexive awareness a central
feature of conscious mental states and thereby qualifies as a theory of
consciousness. Whether reflexive theories are variants of Higher-Order
Theory (“sister”) or a “same-order” account of consciousness as self-
awareness (“cousin”) is in dispute (Van Gulick, 2019).
Social psychologist Alexander Durig claims that our two brain
hemispheres, operating as two brains, aware of each other and inter-
acting with each other, exist in a system of “interactive reflexivity,” and
it is this reflexivity, while being perpetually aware of the world and each
other’s perception of the world, that is the foundation of consciousness
(Durig, 2023).
9.8.4. Lau’s perceptual reality monitoring theory
Cognitive neuroscientist Hakwan Lau introduces Perceptual Reality
Monitoring Theory, which he says is an empirically-grounded higher-
order theory of conscious perception. He proposes that conscious
perception in an agent occurs “if there is a relevant higher-order rep-
resentation with the content that a particular first-order perceptual rep-
resentation is a reliable reflection of the external world right now. The
occurrence of this higher-order representation gives rise to conscious
experiences with the perceptual content represented by the relevant
first-order state.” This structure allows us to distinguish “reality from
fantasy in a generally reliable fashion” (Lau, 2019a).
The agent is not conscious of the content of this higher-order rep-
resentation itself, Lau says, “but the representation is instantiated in the
system in such a way to allow relevant inferences to be drawn (auto-
matically) and to be made available to the agent (on a personal level, in
ways that make the inferences feel subjectively justified)” (Lau, 2019a).
It is a subpersonal process. “That is, we don’t have to think hard to come
up with this higher-order representation. It’s not a thought in that
sense.” Rather, “this higher-order representation serves as a tag or label
indicating the suitable epistemic status of the sensory representation,
and functions as a gating mechanism to route the relevant sensory in-
formation for further cognitive processing” (Lau, 2022, p. 28).
This structural mechanism, Lau asserts, sets his view “apart from
global theories” (9.8.3). This is because, he says, “such further pro-
cessing is only a potential consequence, but not a constitutive part of the
subjective experience … In other words, consciousness is neither
cognition nor metacognition. It is the mechanistic interface right be-
tween perception and cognition.” Lau believes that “such higher-order
mechanisms likely reside within the mammalian prefrontal cortex,
where the functions of perceptual metacognition are also carried out”
(Lau, 2022, p. 28).
But can we ask what happens when higher-order representation is
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
73
missing? Wouldn’t subjective experience also be missing? This explains,
Lau says, “why sometimes sensory representations alone do not lead to
conscious experiences at all, as in conditions like blindsight, where,
because of brain damage, a person (or an animal) is able to respond
accurately to visual stimuli while denying any conscious awareness of
them” (Lau, 2022, pp. 35–36).
Blindsight, in fact, is a litmus test for any theory of consciousness and
Lau claims his theory offers the most coherent explanation: Blindsight
“occurs when a first-order representation occurs without the corre-
sponding higher-order representation … That’s why the perceptual ca-
pacity is there (due to the first-order representations), but the
phenomenology of conscious perception is missing” (Lau, 2019b).
Lau says his theory is a functionalist account. As such, he says, “some
animals may not be conscious. And yet, perhaps even a robot or com-
puter program could be.” He highlights “the role of memory in conscious
experience, even for simple percepts. How an experience feels depends
on implicit memory of the relationships between different perceptual
representations within the brain” (Lu et al., 2022).
Lau critiques both the global view of consciousness (9.2.3) and the
local view (9.8.1 and 9.8.2) as “polar extremes,” arguing that his own
intermediate or centrist position is superior (Lau, 2022, pp. 25, 26, 130).
As part of his model, he takes from artificial intelligence the idea of a
“discriminator,” which can distinguish between “real” and “self--
generated” images (Lau, 2022, p. 142). Applied to human consciousness,
an analogous “discriminator” “distinguishes between true perceptions of
the world, memory, fantasy, and neuronal noise. For conscious
perception of an object to occur, this discriminator must confirm that the
early sensory information represents the object. This model, Lau asserts,
accounts for sensory richness, because higher-order representations
access richer, lower-level perceptions of first-order representations
(Stirrups, 2023). Bottom line, Lau strikes the ambitious claim that his
theory explains the subjective “what-it-is-like-ness” of first-person
experience—why it “feels like something” to be in a particular brain
state, say with a sharp pain—mediated by higher-order representations
in the brain (Lau, 2022, p. 197).
Enhancing his model, Lau proposes that “because of the way the
mammalian sensory cortices are organized, perceptual signals in the
brain are spatially ‘analog’ in a specific sense,” which enables
“computational advantages.” Given this analog nature, “when a sensory
representation becomes conscious, not only do we have the tendency to
think that its content reflects the state of the world right now, also
determined is what it is like to have the relevant experience—in terms of
how subjectively similar it is with respect to all other possible experi-
ences.” Lau submits that this addresses the hard problem, “better than
prominent alternative views” (Lau, 2022, p. 29).
9.8.5. LeDoux’s higher-order theory of emotional consciousness
Neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux’s Higher-Order Theory of Emotional
Consciousness combines his approach to higher-order representation-
alism (9.8.3) and his commitment to the centrality of emotion. His thesis
is that “the brain mechanisms that give rise to conscious emotional
feelings are not fundamentally different from those that give rise to
perceptual conscious experiences.” Both, he proposes, “involve higher-
order representations (HORs) of lower-order information by cortically
based general networks of cognition” (GNC). The theory argues that
GNC and “self-centered higher-order states are essential for emotional
experiences” (Ledoux and Brown, 2017).
LeDoux challenges the traditional view that emotional states of
consciousness (emotional feelings) are “innately programmed in
subcortical areas of the brain,” and are “as different from cognitive states
of consciousness, such as those related to the perception of external
stimuli.” Rather, LeDoux argues that “conscious experiences, regardless
of their content, arise from one system in the brain” and that “emotions
are higher-order states instantiated in cortical circuits.” In this view, all
that differs in emotional and nonemotional states are “the kinds of in-
puts that are processed.” According to LeDoux, “although subcortical
circuits are not directly responsible for conscious feelings, they provide
nonconscious inputs that coalesce with other kinds of neural signals in
the cognitive assembly of conscious emotional experiences.”
For understanding the emotional brain, LeDoux focuses on “fear,”
defining it as “the conscious feeling one has when in danger.” In the
presence of a threat, he says, “different circuits underlie the conscious
feelings of fear and the behavioral responses and physiological responses
that also occur.” But it is the “experience of fear,” the conscious
emotional feeling of fear, that informs LeDoux’s theory of consciousness,
which he explains as follows. “A first-order representation of the threat
enters into a higher-order representation, along with relevant long-term
memories—including emotion schema—that are retrieved. This initial
HOR involving the threat and the relevant memories occurs non-
consciously. Then, a HOROR [i.e., a third-order state, a HOR of a rep-
resentation, a HOR of a HOR] allows for the conscious noetic experience
of the stimulus as dangerous. However, to have the emotional autonoetic
experience of fear, the self must be included in the HOROR” (Ledoux and
Brown, 2017).
Advancing his theory, LeDoux explores “introspection,” the term
given by higher-order theorists to this third level of representations, that
is, “to be aware of the higher-order state (to be conscious that you are in
that state).” LeDoux proposes “a more inclusive view of introspection, in
which the term indicates the process by which phenomenally experi-
enced states result.” Introspection, he says, “can involve either passive
noticing (as, for example, in the case of consciously seeing a ripe
strawberry on the counter) or active scrutinizing (as in the case of
deliberate focused attention to our conscious experience of the ripe
strawberry).” Both kinds of introspection lead to phenomenal experi-
ence, in LeDoux’s view (Ledoux and Brown, 2017).
HOROR theory states that “phenomenal consciousness does not
reflect a sensory state (as proposed by first-order theory) or the relation
between a sensory state and a higher-order cognitive state of working
memory (as proposed by traditional HOT). Instead, HOROR posits that
phenomenal consciousness consists of having the appropriate HOR of
lower-order information, where lower-order does not necessarily mean
sensory, but instead refers to a prior higher-order state that is rerepre-
sented.” He says, “This second HOR is thought-like and, in virtue of this,
instantiates the phenomenal, introspectively accessed experience of the
external sensory stimulus. That is, to have a phenomenal experience is to
be introspectively aware of a nonconscious HOR.” He distinguishes or-
dinary introspective awareness, which is the passive kind of “noticing”
that he postulates is responsible for phenomenal consciousness, “from
the active scrutinizing of one’s conscious experience that requires
deliberate attentive focus on one’s phenomenal consciousness.” Active
introspection, he stresses, “requires an additional layer of HOR (and thus
a HOR of a HOROR).”
In studies of human patients, LeDoux and his PhD adviser, Michael
Gazzaniga, “concluded that conscious experiences are the result of
cognitive interpretation situations in an effort to help maintain a sense
of mental unity in the face of the neural diversity of non-conscious
behavioral control systems in our brain” (LeDoux, 2023b).
Rejecting the notion of the “self,” and certainly mind-body dualism,
LeDoux positions “consciousness” as the fourth and final “realm of ex-
istence” for animal life, the four realms being “bodily, neural, cognitive,
and conscious.” LeDoux replaces the self with an “ensemble of being”
that “subsumes our entire human existence, both as individuals and as a
species” (LeDoux, 2023a).
LeDoux’s views continue to develop. In particular, he picks out two
overarching perspectives. First, his multi-state hierarchical model of con-
sciousness, which features an intricate anatomical framework evincing
the complexity of higher-order processing via redundancy. The multi-
state hierarchical model of consciousness, he says, “replaces the tradi-
tional volley between the sensory cortex and the lateral PFC [prefrontal
cortex] with a more complex anatomical arrangement consisting of a
hierarchy of structures, each of which creates different kinds of states
that are re-represented/re-described by circuits of sub-granular and
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
74
granular PFC and that contribute to higher-order mental modeling and
conscious experience. The states that constitute the functional features
of the multi-state hierarchical higher-order theory of consciousness, and
the brain areas that are associated with these states, include primary
lower-order states (areas of the sensory cortex); secondary lower-order
states (memory areas and other convergence zones in the temporal
and parietal lobes); sub-higher-order states (meso-cortical areas of sub-
granular PFC, including the anterior cingulate, orbital, ventromedial,
prelimbic, and insula PFC); and higher-order states that re-represent/re-
describe/index the various other states to construct mental models in
working memory (granular PFC)” (LeDoux, 2023a, p. 234).
LeDoux’s second overarching perspective is the dual mental hypoth-
esis that shows the interplay between preconscious and conscious states
and the role of narratives in driving them. In the dual mental-model
hypothesis, he says, “explicit consciousness of complex events emerges
from interactions between granular and sub-granular PFC states. Lower-
order non-PFC states, while often involved as inputs to the PFC, are not
necessary for such higher-order conscious experiences. In other words, a
thought, which is a higher-order state constructed by a pre-conscious
mental model, is sufficient to populate the conscious higher-order
state via the second mental model.” The output of the conscious
mental model, he says, “much like the output of the pre-conscious
mental model, is an abstract mentalese narrative (albeit a conscious
one) that feeds distributaries flowing to motor circuits that control overt
behavior and verbal expression.” LeDoux senses that “this implies that
we have conscious agency, which you may know of as free will”-
—adding, “the question of whether we actually make conscious choices
is a matter of debate” (LeDoux, 2023a, pp. 296–297).
9.8.6. Humphrey’s mental representations and brain attractors
Neuropsychologist Nicholas Humphrey employs an evolutionary
framework, combining mental representations with what he calls
“attractor states in the brain,” to develop a novel materialistic theory of
phenomenal consciousness, which he sees as a late and not ubiquitous
evolutionary development. His multi-discipline argument follows (Sec-
tion: Humphrey, 2023a,b, 2022, 2024; Humphrey, 2023a,b).
Sensations, he says, are ideas we generate: mental representations of
stimuli arriving at our sense organs and how they affect us. Their
properties are to be explained, therefore, not literally as the properties of
brain-states, but rather as the properties of mind-states dreamed up by
the brain. Remarkably, we (and presumably other sentient creatures)
represent what’s happening as having “phenomenal properties”, or
“qualia”, that fill the “thick time” of the subjective present. The result is
we come to have a psychologically impressive sense of self—a
“phenomenal self” that is semi-independent of our physical bodies. This
idea of “what it’s like to be me” may be in some respects “fake news”; but
Humphrey’s point is that, to us as the subjects, it’s big news!
When it comes to how sensations are generated in the brain, Hum-
phrey points out this has to be a two-stage process: first the gathering of
sensory information, which is the sensory text, then the interpretation of
this information, which is the conscious reading. This two-stage process
generates our subjective take on what this is like for us. Phenomenal
properties arise only at the interpretative stage. This, Humphrey
stresses, is “a point often lost on researchers looking for the neural
correlates of consciousness, who assume the properties of the brain ac-
tivity must map onto the phenomenal properties of conscious experi-
ence.” He calls the hard problem “the wrong problem” (Humphrey,
2022).
Humphrey believes that our best approach to explaining sentience
(which is how he labels phenomenal consciousness) will be “forward
engineering”—reconstructing the steps by which natural selection could
have invented it. He proposes that sensations originated in primitive
animals as evaluative responses to stimulation at the body surface. Thus,
sensations started out as something the animal did about the stimulation
rather than something it felt about it. Early on, however, animals hit on
the trick of monitoring these responses—by means of an “efference
copy” of the command signals—to yield a simple representation of what
the stimulation is about. In short, a feeling (Humphrey, 2023a,b).
Humphrey’s story quickens, as that feeling became privatised,
resulting in activity in neural feedback loops, which became recursive
and stretched out in time, taking on complex higher-order properties. It
was then refined and stabilised to generate mathematically complex
attractor states, which would give rise—“out of the blue”—to the
apparently unaccountable qualities of sensory qualia. Quite possibly, he
says, phenomenal experience involves the brain generating something
like an internal text, which it interprets as being about phenomenal
properties. The driving force behind these later developments was the
adaptive benefits to the animal of the emergence of the phenomenal self.
This is why Humphrey takes phenomenal consciousness as a rela-
tively late evolutionary invention, having evolved only in animal species
that (a) have brains capable of entertaining and enjoying these fancy
mental representations, and (b) lead lives in which having this bold
sense of self can give them an edge in the fitness game. Thus, Humphrey
challenges conventional wisdom that phenomenal consciousness in the
animal kingdom is a gradient; his “hunch” is that only mammals and
birds make the cut. Chimpanzees, dogs, parrots have it. Lobsters, lizards,
frogs do not (Humphrey, 2023a,b).
9.8.7. Metzinger’s no-self representational theory of subjectivity
Philosopher Thomas Metzinger presents a representationalist and
functional analysis of subjectivity, the consciously experienced first-
person perspective (Metzinger, 2004). What has been traditionally
called “conscious thought,” he argues, is actually “a subpersonal pro-
cess, and only rarely a form of mental action. The paradigmatic, stan-
dard form of conscious thought is non-agentive, because it lacks
veto-control and involves an unnoticed loss of epistemic agency and
goal-directed causal self-determination at the level of mental content.”
Conceptually, Metzinger states, “conscious thought … must be described
as an unintentional form of inner behaviour” (Metzinger, 2015).
A starting assumption is that phenomenal consciousness (subjective
experience), “rather than being an epiphenomenon, has a causal role in
the optimisation of certain human behaviours” (Frith and Metzinger,
2016). A leitmotif of Metzinger’s models is that there are no such things
as “selves”; selves do not exist in the world: “nobody ever had or was a
self.” All that exists, he argues, are “phenomenal selves, as they appear
in conscious experience. The phenomenal self, however, is not a thing
but an ongoing process; it is the content of a ‘transparent self-model’”
(Metzinger, 2004).
Metzinger employs empirical research to support his deflationary no-
self model, showing how “we are not mentally autonomous subjects for
about two thirds of our conscious lifetime, because while conscious
cognition is unfolding, it often cannot be inhibited, suspended, or
terminated.” This means that “the instantiation of a stable first-person
perspective as well as of certain necessary conditions of personhood
turn out to be rare, graded, and dynamically variable properties of
human beings” (Metzinger, 2015).
Drawing on a large psychometric study of meditators in 57 coun-
tries—more than 500 experiential reports—Metzinger focuses on “pure
awareness” in meditation—the simplest form of experience there is—to
illuminate, as he puts it, “the most fundamental aspects of how con-
sciousness, the brain, and illusions of self all interact.” Metzinger ex-
plores “the increasingly non-egoic experiences of silence, wakefulness,
and clarity, of bodiless body-experience, ego-dissolution, and nondual
awareness” in order to assemble “what it would take to arrive at a
minimal model explanation for conscious experience and create a
genuine culture of consciousness” (Metzinger, 2024).
Metzinger uses an interdisciplinary, multi-layer analysis of
phenomenological, representationalist, informational-computational,
functional, and physical-neurobiological kinds of descriptions. His
representationalist theory analyzes its target properties—those aspects
of the domain to be explained. He seeks to make progress “by describing
conscious systems as representational systems and conscious states as
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
75
representational states” (Metzinger, 2000). He argues that “individual
representational events only become part of a personal-level process by
being functionally integrated into a specific form of transparent
conscious self-representation, the ‘epistemic agent model’ (EAM).” The
EAM, he suspects, “may be the true origin of our consciously experi-
enced first-person perspective” (Metzinger, 2015).
Metzinger’s resolution of the mind-body problem follows directly:
our Cartesian intuitions that subjective experiences, phenomenal con-
sciousness, “can never be reductively explained are themselves ulti-
mately rooted in the deeper representational structure of our conscious
minds” (Metzinger, 2004).
A corollary of Metzinger’s work concerns individual behavior and
collective culture, based on our perception of the experience of being an
agent that causes events in the world and the belief that we “could have
done otherwise” (the test of libertarian free will). This experience and
belief enable us “to justify our behaviour to ourselves and to others and,
in the longer term, create a cultural narrative about responsibility.”
Metzinger concludes that “conscious experience is necessary for opti-
mizing flexible intrapersonal interactions and for the emergence of cu-
mulative culture” (Frith and Metzinger, 2016).
9.8.8. Jackson’s diaphanous representationalism and the knowledge
argument
Philosopher Frank Jackson develops a representationalist view about
perceptual experience. “That experience is diaphanousness (or trans-
parent) is a thesis about the phenomenology of perceptual experience. It
is the thesis that the properties that make an experience the kind of
experience it is are properties of the object of experience.” In other
words, “accessing the nature of the experience itself is nothing other
than accessing the properties of its object” (Jackson, 2007).
Jackson uses his Diaphanous Representationalism theory to under-
mine his own prior argument against materialism/physicalism based on
the famous thought experiment of Mary the brilliant neurophysiologist
who is forced to investigate the world from a black and white room via a
black and white television monitor, and who acquires all the physical
information there is to obtain about what goes on when we see colors.
“What will happen when Mary is released from her black and white
room or is given a color television monitor? Will she learn anything or
not? It seems just obvious that she will learn something about the world
and our visual experience of it. But then it is inescapable that her pre-
vious knowledge was incomplete. But she had all the physical infor-
mation. Ergo there is more to have than that, and Physicalism is false”
(Jackson, 1982).
Jackson argues that “although the diaphanousness thesis alone does
not entail representationalism, the thesis supports an inference from a
weaker to a stronger version of representationalism. On the weak
version, perceptual experience is essentially representational. On the
strong version, how an experience represents things as being exhausts its
experiential nature.” This means that there is nothing else needed to
bring about phenomenal consciousness (qualia). Hence, according to
Jackson, “strong representationalism undermines the claim that Mary
learns new truths when she leaves the room”—which would defeat the
defeater of materialism/physicalism (Jackson, 2007).
Philosopher Torin Alter disagrees, arguing that representationalism
provides no basis for rejecting the knowledge argument, because even if
representational character exhausts phenomenal character, “the physi-
calist must still face a representationalist version of the Mary challenge,
which inherits the difficulty of the original” (Alter, 2003).
9.8.9. Lycan’s homuncular functionalism
Philosopher William Lycan defends a materialist, representational
theory of mind that he calls “homuncular functionalism” and which
posits that “human beings are ‘functionally organized information-
processing systems’ who have no non-physical parts or properties.”
Lycan does recognize “the subjective phenomenal qualities of mental
states and events, and an important sense in which mind is ‘over and
above’ mere chemical matter” (Lycan, 1987). But he defends materi-
alism in general and functionalist theories of mind in particular by
arguing for what he calls the "hegemony of representation," in that
“there is no more to mind or consciousness than can be accounted for in
terms of intentionality, functional organization, and in particular,
second-order representation of one’s own mental states” (Lycan, 1996).
Reviewing “an explosion of work” in consciousness studies by phi-
losophers, psychologists, and neuroscientists, Lycan is “struck by an
astonishing diversity of topics that have gone under the heading of
“consciousness”—he lists more than 15, only six of which, he says, deal
with “phenomenal experience,” that is, qualia and the explanatory gap.
From this he draws “two morals.” First, he says, “no one should claim
that problems of phenomenal experience have been solved by any purely
cognitive or neuroscientific theory.” (Here Lycan finds himself in “sur-
prising agreement with Chalmers.”) Second and perhaps more impor-
tantly, he says, some of “the theories cannot fairly be criticized for
failing to illuminate problems of phenomenal experience”—because that
is not what they intend to do, that is, “they may be theories of, say,
awareness or of privileged access, not theories of qualia or of subjec-
tivity or of ‘what it’s like’” (Lycan, 2004).
Lycan defends “the Representational theory of the qualitative fea-
tures of apparent phenomenal objects: When you see a (real) ripe banana
and there is a corresponding yellow patch in your visual field, the yel-
lowness ‘of’ the patch is, like the banana itself, a representatum, an
intentional object of the experience. The experience represents the ba-
nana and it represents the yellowness of the banana, and the latter yel-
lowness is all the yellowness that is involved; there is no mental patch
that is itself yellow. If you were only hallucinating a banana, the unreal
banana would still be a representatum, but now an intentional inexis-
tent; and so would be its yellowness. The yellowness would be as it is
even though the banana were not real” (Lycan, 2004).
Lycan agrees that the “explanatory gap” is real. But this is for two
reasons, he argues, “neither of which embarrasses materialism.” First, he
says, “phenomenal information and facts of ‘what it’s like’ are ineffable.
But one cannot explain what one cannot express in the first place. (The
existence of ineffable facts is no embarrassment to science or to mate-
rialism, so long as they are fine-grained ‘facts,’ incorporating modes of
presentation.)” Second, he says, “the Gap is not confined to conscious-
ness in any sense or even to mind; there are many kinds of intrinsically
perspectival (fine-grained) facts that cannot be explained” (without first
conceding a pre-existing identity) (Lycan, 2004).
In their review, Thomas Polger and Owen Flanagan describe Lycan’s
view as, roughly, that “conscious beings are hierarchically composed
intentional systems, whose representational powers are to be under-
stood in terms of their biological function.” They call the view “teleo-
logical functionalism”
or “teleofunctionalism”
and state “the
homuncular part, for which Lycan and Daniel Dennett argued convinc-
ingly, is now so widely accepted that it fails to distinguish Lycan’s view
from other versions of functionalism. This, by itself, is a testament to the
importance of Lycan’s work” (Polger and Flanagan, 2001).
In his review, Frank Jackson explains that when Lycan argues “there
is no special problem for physicalism raised by conscious experience,”
he is rightly distinguishing two questions. “Does consciousness per se
raise a problem? And: Do qualia pose a special problem?” Lycan answers
the first question on consciousness by defending an “inner sense account
of consciousness,” holding that "consciousness is the functioning of in-
ternal attention mechanisms directed at lower-order psychological
states and events." Jackson is less satisfied by Lycan’s rejection of the
knowledge argument, which Jackson calls “the most forceful way of
raising the problem posed by qualia for physicalism.” (Jackson says this
“as someone who no longer accepts the argument”) (Jackson, 1997).
According to Jackson, Lycan is confident that phenomenal nature is
exhausted by functional role. In other words, “for Lycan, it is very hard
for functional nature to fail to exhaust phenomenal nature. Almost
anything you might cite as escaping the functional net is, by his lights,
functional after all.” Moreover, Lycan has “the nature of conscious
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
76
experience exhausted by the intentional contents or representational
nature of the relevant kinds of mental states” in that “the representa-
tional facts which make up a package [is] sufficient to capture in full the
perceptual experience” (Jackson, 1997).
Lycan attacks neurobiological conventional wisdom in that “all too
often we hear it suggested that advances in neuroscience will solve
Thomas Nagel’s and Frank Jackson’s conceptual problem of “knowing
what it’s like.” To Lycan, “this is grievously confused. For Nagel’s and
Jackson’s claim is precisely that there is an irreducible kind of
phenomenal knowledge that cannot be revealed by science of any kind.
Nagel’s and Jackson’s respective ‘Knowledge Arguments’ for this radical
thesis are purely philosophical; they contain no premises that depend on
scientific fact.” Lycan now presses his sharp point. “Either the arguments
are unsound or they are sound. If they are unsound, then so far as has
been shown, there is no such irreducible knowledge, and neither science
nor anything else is needed to produce it. But if the arguments are sound,
they show that no amount of science could possibly help to produce the
special phenomenal knowledge. Either way, neither neuroscience nor
any other science is pertinent.”
Lycan seems sure that the “what it’s like to be” and knowledge ar-
guments are unsound and he can go about formulating his Representa-
tional theory of mind standing squarely in the materialist camp. (I am
not so sure. It is my uncertainty that motivates this Landscape of
Consciousness.)
9.8.10. Transparency theory
Transparency theory makes the argument that because sensory (e.g.,
visual) experience represents external objects and their apparent prop-
erties, experience has no other properties that pose problems for mate-
rialism. We “see right through” perceptual states to external objects and
take no notice that we are actually in perceptual states; the properties we
perceive in perception are attributed to the objects themselves, not to
the perception (Lycan, 2019). If we look at a tree and try to turn our
attention to the intrinsic features of our visual experience, the only
features there to turn our attention to are features of the actual tree it-
self, including relational features of the tree from the perspective of the
perceiver (Harman, 1990).
To make the argument, at a minimum, an additional premise is
needed: If a perceptual state has mental properties over and above its
representational properties, they must be “introspectible.” But “not even
the most determined introspection ever reveals any such additional
properties.” This is the transparency thesis proper (Lycan, 2019).
Philosopher Amy Kind cites experiential transparency as a major
motivation driving representational theories of consciousness, which
view phenomenal character as being reduced to intentional content.
Assuming experience is transparent in that we “look right through”
experience to the objects of that experience, “this is supposed to support
the representationalist claim that there are no intrinsic aspects of our
experience” (Kind, 2010).
Philosopher Michael Tye states that one important motivation for the
theory that “phenomenal character is one and the same as representa-
tional content” is “the so-called ‘transparency of experience.’” He ad-
dresses introspective awareness of experience and one problem case for
transparency, that of blurry vision (Tye, 2002). A similar theory is
“intentionalism,” the view that the phenomenal character of experience
supervenes on intentional content (Pace, 2007).
Philosopher Dirk Franken characterizes “the transparency of
appearing” as follows: "The phenomenal quality of a particular state of
appearing is fully exhausted by the sensible properties present to the
subject of the state and their distribution over the respective field of
appearance.” Starting “from the assumption that the transparency of
appearing is a purely phenomenological feature,” Franken describes his
“Transparency Thesis” with several propositions: “There are no other
properties, next to the sensible properties, that have any bearing on the
phenomenal quality of a state of appearing. The presentation of sensible
properties is just all there is to the phenomenal quality of a state of
appearing. No properties of the subject (insofar as it is the subject of this
state) or of the state itself contribute to this phenomenal quality.” He
defends “surprising consequences” of the Transparency Thesis. First,
“one has to give up the idea of the first-person-perspective as a kind of
inner seeming or appearing directed onto mental states (at least, if the
relevant states are states of appearing).” Next, two assumptions entailed
in numerous popular accounts of phenomenal consciousness are
negated: (i) “phenomenal qualities are properties of states of appearing
that are independent or partly independent of the (sensible) properties
presented in these states; ” and (ii) “there can be phenomenally
conscious states of appearing even though there is nothing that is pre-
sented to their subjects” (Franken, n.d.).
9.8.11. Tye’s contingentism
Philosopher Michael Tye proposes a theory of consciousness he calls
“contingentism,” which is a kind of identity theory (i.e., phenomenal
states and physical/brain states are literally the same) but with a novel
twist: while the identity is indeed true in our world, it is not meta-
physically true in all possible worlds. “Scenarios in which the relevant
physical processing is present and consciousness is missing are easily
imaginable (and thus metaphysically possible), but this is irrelevant if it
is only a contingent fact that consciousness is a physical phenomenon”
(Tye, 2023).32
Contingentism, Tye states, “finds its origins in the views of Feigl,
Place and Smart in the 1950s and 1960s. These philosophers held that
sensations are contingently identical with brain processes, where sen-
sations are understood to be conscious states such as pain or the visual
experience of red.” The identity here was taken to be contingent, in part,
because “it was taken to be clear that scientific type-type identities
generally are contingent.” Smart’s example was that he could imagine
that lightning is not an electrical discharge. (These claims are mistaken,
Tye says; “If in actual fact lightning is an electrical discharge, it could not
have been otherwise.”) (Tye, 2023).
Tye says, “the contingentist about consciousness agrees with the
above remarks concerning lightning and is happy to extend them to
many other scientific identity statements. But the contingentist holds
that the case of conscious mental states—states such that there is
something it is like to undergo them—is different. Here the claim is not
that such states are contingently identical with brain processes, but that
such states are contingently identical with physical states of some sort or
other, where the notion of a physical state is to be understood broadly to
include not only neurophysiological states but also other states that are
grounded in microphysical states, including functional states or states of
the sort posited by representationalism, for example. For conscious
states, the identities are contingent since we can easily imagine their
having not obtained. For example, we can easily imagine a zombie un-
dergoing the physical state with which the experience of fear is to be
identified and yet not experiencing fear at all. Similarly, we can easily
imagine someone experiencing fear without undergoing the given
physical state” (Tye, 2023).
The solution, Tye suggests, “lies with the realization that it is a
mistake to model the consciousness case on that of physical-physical
relationships. Qualitative character Q is identical with physical prop-
erty R, if physicalism is true. But this is a contingent identity (even
though the designators ‘Q’ and ‘R’ are rigid). So, we can imagine Q
without R (and R without Q), but the fact that we can do so is not an
indicator of an explanatory gap. A creature could indeed have been in a
state having Q without being in a state having R and vice-versa” (Tye,
2023).
Might things have been different in the actual world? Indeed, they
might, Tye says. “The physical processing might have gone on just as it
32 Tye notes that “contrary to orthodoxy, there is no obvious difficulty with
holding that identity statements in which the identity sign is flanked by rigid
designators are sometimes contingent” (Tye, 2023).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
77
does, the information processing might have been just the same, the
cognitive machinery might have functioned as it does, and yet along
with all of this, Q might not have been present in experience. That is
certainly intelligible to us. But it creates no explanatory puzzle; for that
is only a metaphysically possible world. It is not the actual world. As far
as the actual world goes, there is nothing puzzling or problematic,
nothing left to explain … No mystery remains” (Tye, 2023).
This is because “in the actual world,” consciousness is physical, ac-
cording to the physicalist, “since it is only on the hypothesis of physi-
calism with respect to the actual world that problems of emergence and
causal efficacy can be handled satisfactorily, or so the physicalist
believes.”
Thus, Tye concludes, “once we become contingentists, the hard
problem has a straightforward and satisfying solution.”
In support of his views, Tye turns to “vagueness” in assessing con-
sciousness in the hierarchical taxonomy of life and in the process of
evolution (Tye, 2021). According to Tye, “The two dominant theories of
consciousness argue it appeared in living beings either suddenly, or
gradually. Both theories face problems. The solution is the realization
that a foundational consciousness was always here, yet varying
conscious states were not, and appeared gradually.” Given that it is
hardly obvious how to discern which organisms are conscious, and, if so,
their kind or level of consciousness, borderline cases of consciousness
can make no sense. As David Papineau reviews Tye, “But this isn’t
because a sharp line is found somewhere as we move from
non-conscious physical systems to conscious ones. Rather [according to
Tye] it’s because no such line exists at all. Even the most basic constit-
uents of physical reality are already endowed with consciousness”
(Papineau, 2022). Thus, Tye transitions from his traditional physicalism
to a form of panpsychism, though differing from those of mainstream
panpsychists (13).33
In admirable full disclosure, Tye states that his contingentism “is
written from the perspective of the reductive physicalist (understood
broadly to include functionalists and representationalists),” and that he
believes contingentism presents “the best hope for a defense of reductive
physicalism.” However, he adds, “I myself am no longer a thorough-
going reductive physicalist. I now believe that there is an element in our
consciousness that cannot be captured via higher level reductions” (Tye,
2023).
In addition, Tye suggests that, from the representationalist perspec-
tive and supporting its views, “history matters crucially to phenome-
nology. What it is like for an individual at a given time is fixed not just by
what is going on in the individual at that time but also by what was
going on in the individual in the past. Two individuals can be exactly
alike intrinsically at a time and yet differ in the phenomenal character of
their mental life at that time” (Tye, 2019).
Tye concludes that “once we think of experiences in a representa-
tionalist and broadly reductionist way,” we can better appreciate phe-
nomenology, including its presence or absence, such as in thought
experiments where “a person slowly acquires a silicon chip brain” (see
Virtual Immortality, 25).
9.8.12. Thagard’s neural representation, binding, coherence, competition
Philosopher Paul Thagard poses big questions upfront. “Why do
people have conscious experiences that include perceptions such as
seeing, sensations such as pain, emotions such as joy, and abstract
thoughts such as self-reflection? Why is consciousness central to so much
of human life, including dreams, laughter, music, religion, sports, mo-
rality, and romance? Are such experiences also possessed by other ani-
mals, plants, and robots?” (Thagard, 2024).
Thagard’s theory of consciousness “attributes conscious experiences
to interactions of four brain mechanisms: neural representation, bind-
ing, coherence, and competition.” It distinguishes itself from current
theories in several respects, he says. “The four brain mechanisms
described are empirically plausible and clearly stated. Conscious expe-
riences emerge from their interactions in areas across the brain.” The
mechanisms, he argues, “explain not only ordinary perceptual experi-
ences such as vision, but also the most complex kinds of conscious
experience including self-valuation, dreams, humor, and religious awe.”
Moreover, he adds, “A crucial but often neglected aspect of conscious-
ness is timing, but the four mechanisms fit perfectly with recent
neuroscientific findings about how time cells enable brains to track ex-
periences” (Thagard, 2024).
Thagard’s founds his theory on strict, empirically based neurosci-
ence. His way of thinking is exemplified by his “Attribution Procedure,”
an eight-step process for using what he calls “explanatory coherence” as
a touchstone to establish “whether or not an animal or machine has a
mental state, property, or process.” (Thagard, 2021, pp. 13–14). For
example, he offers twelve features of intelligence (i.e., problem solving,
learning, understanding, reasoning, perceiving, planning, deciding,
abstracting, creating, feeling, acting, communicating) and eight mech-
anisms to explain these features (i.e., images, concepts, rules, analogies,
emotions, language, intentional action, consciousness). “All eight of
these mental mechanisms can be carried out by a common set of neural
mechanisms, many of which have been modeled computationally.” This
account of twelve features and eight mechanisms, Thagard says, “yields
a twenty-item checklist for assessing intelligence in bots and beasts.” A
similar way of thinking he applies to consciousness, stating that con-
sciousness results from competition among neural representations
(Thagard, 2021, pp. 3–4, 50, 49).
Claiming that his theory of consciousness possesses “the accuracy
and breadth of application to mark a solid advance in the grand task of
explaining how and why consciousness is so central to human life,”
Thagard highlights an empirically supported explanation of conscious-
ness resulting from the four brain mechanisms (i.e., neural representa-
tion, binding, coherence, and competition); application to a broad range
of conscious experiences including smell, hunger, loneliness, self-
awareness, religious experience, sports performance, and romantic
chemistry; use of these four brain mechanisms to generate novel theories
of dreaming, humor, and musical experience; a new theory of time
consciousness; assessment of consciousness in non-human animals and
machines, including the new generative AI models such as ChatGPT
(Thagard, 2024).
Working together, these four brain mechanisms, Thagard says,
“explain the full range of consciousness in humans and other animals,
and show why plants, bacteria, and ordinary things lack consciousness.”
No current computers are conscious, he asserts, using a checklist of
features and mechanisms of consciousness, “but the new generative
models in artificial intelligence have similar mechanisms to humans that
might enable some degree of consciousness.” He concludes with high
physicalist confidence: “Consciousness does not need to be a mystery
once we understand how brains build it” (Thagard, 2024).
9.8.13. T. Clark’s content hypothesis
Philosopher Thomas Clark posits phenomenal consciousness as the
representational content of a cognitive system’s sufficiently structured
representational processing (Clark, T., 2019). Conscious experience ex-
ists only for the conscious system, so is categorically subjective, and its
basic elements are irreducibly qualitative. As a general rule, he says, we
don’t find representational content in the world it participates in rep-
resenting, which can help explain subjectivity. Moreover, following
Metzinger’s concept of an “untranscendable object,” a representational
system must have epistemic primitives that resist further representation
on pain of a metabolically expensive representational regress. This can
help explain the non-decomposable, monadic character of basic sensory
qualities such as red, sweet, pain, etc. Developments in the science of
representation and representational content, he says, may (or may not)
33 To speak of “mainstream panpsychists”—when I was doing neurophysi-
ology (mid 1960s, UCLA Brain Research Institute)—would have seemed an
oxymoron.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
78
vindicate the Content Hypothesis. Clark says that his model is consistent
with Integrated Information Theory, Global Workspace Theory, and
Predictive Processing, all of which involve representation (Clark, T.,
2019, 2024).
Clark, a proponent of naturalism as a worldview (Clark, T., 2007),
believes that a materialist can see that “consciousness, as a strictly
physical phenomenon instantiated by the brain, creates a world sub-
jectively immune to its own disappearance … it is the very finitude of a
self-reflective cognitive system that bars it from witnessing its own
beginning or ending, and hence prevents there being, for it, any condi-
tion other than existing” (Clark, T., 1994). While this sounds odd, almost
an oxymoron, Clark develops the idea of “generic subjective continuity"
based on a thought experiment inspired by the work of philosopher
Derek Parfit. Clark argues in that at death we shouldn’t anticipate the
onset of nothingness or oblivion—a common secular intuition—but
rather the continuation of experience, just not in the context of the
person who dies. The end of one’s own consciousness, he offers, “is only
an event, and its non-existence a current fact, from other perspectives.”
After death we won’t experience non-being, he says, we won’t ‘fade to
black’. Rather, as conscious being we continue “as the generic subjec-
tivity that always finds itself here, in the various contexts of awareness
that the physical universe manages to create” (Clark, T., 1994).
9.8.14. Deacon’s symbolic communication (human consciousness)
Neuroanthropologist Terrence Deacon asserts that symbolic
communication has radically altered the nature of human conscious-
ness, whereas consciousness broadly is coextensive with the develop-
ment of brains in animals that regulate their movement with the aid of
long-distance senses, such as vision, because of the predictive capacity
this affords and requires. However, symbolic communication has given
humans the capacity of being conscious of a virtual realm that has
become untethered from physical contiguity and immediacy (Deacon,
1998, 2024).34
Moreover, by virtue of the way that symbolic communication allows
us indirect access to others’ thoughts and experiences, we have become a
symbolically eusocial species that derives our personal identities and
ability to think from a physically and temporally extended shared
mentality. Some, he says, have referred to this structure as “Extended
Mind.”
Deacon sees this symbolic mode of cognition as enabling the emer-
gence of novel kinds of remembering and unprecedented forms of
emotional experience, as well as unprecedented forms of value, such as
ethical norms and aesthetic sense. This is also, he says, the source of our
feeling of incompleteness and need to find Meaning.
9.9. Language relationships
Language Relationships discern connections, causal and other, be-
tween consciousness and language. Language obviously enriches the
content of consciousness, perhaps provides a framework for human
consciousness, but is there a deeper relationship? Does consciousness
require language, in that if there is no language capability there can be
no inner experience? Conversely, does language require consciousness,
in that if there is no inner experience, there can be no language capa-
bility? (Note that while language does not generate theories of con-
sciousness per se, it features in some and is rejected in others, both of
which are worth exploring.)
Much depends on careful definitions. To take the consciousness-
requires-language causal paradigm, if by consciousness we mean
phenomenal consciousness, raw inner experience only, then if we claim
that language is required, then our claim would limit phenomenal
consciousness, inner experience, to human beings and would exclude all
(or at least almost all) other animals. Argue this to a happy dog owner
and you will confront an angry dog owner.
To take the language-requires-consciousness causal paradigm, with a
definition of language sufficiently loose to subsume computer languages
or communications between paramecia or signals between embryonic
stem cells, consciousness would not be required.
The philosophical debate regarding whether language is necessary
for consciousness has a long and meandering history. Many argue that
consciousness does not at all require language; others, that conscious-
ness is facilitated by language or even is not possible without it. A
contemporary consensus is building around the idea that increasing
levels of consciousness, ranging from unconsciousness to highly
conscious reflective self-awareness, requires increasing use of language.
What follows would be that language is not needed for pure phenomenal
consciousness, a general state of awareness, or in responding to external
stimuli—such as in preverbal infants—but phenomenal consciousness
would be needed for complex expressions of consciousness, like self-
awareness, information integration, and metaconsciousness, which are
based on language-powered capacities, especially inner speech (Ivory
Research, 2019).
Because we sense that many animal species are conscious—much
like we assume that other humans are conscious like we are conscious-
—and we know that language is much more restricted, to humans and,
in a lesser sense, some other animals (e.g., primates, cetaceans, birds),
this would seem to weaken the consciousness-language nexus. More-
over, language seems to be a much more recent evolutionary emergent
than consciousness (Berwick and Chomsky, 2016).
Philosopher Rebecca Goldstein maintains that language does not
exhaust all that there is in consciousness. She calls as evidence infants
prior to or in the early stages of acquiring language, where “it’s clear
how much consciousness goes on before there is language” (Goldstein,
2014).
Neuroscientist Colin Blakemore sees an intimate relationship be-
tween the structure of language and the high-level aspects of con-
sciousness, especially consciousness of self, the consciousness of
intention—“the concept that I am the helmsman of myself, carrying
myself around the world, making decisions.” He calls the grammatical
forms of language “intentional in their style” and argues that our
conscious representation of self is a meta-representation of what’s really
doing the work down below, and that the reason “our brains go to the
trouble of building this false representation of how we really are is to
implement and to support language” (Blakemore, 2012a).
Blakemore speculates that we don’t come pre-programmed to be
conscious; that we learn to be conscious and our consciousness develops
and changes over time. Recognizing that the term “consciousness” can
refer to diverse forms of subjectivity, and that even a newborn baby has
“a kind of brute awareness of the world, sensory experiences,” he sug-
gests that the nature of subjectivity grows through individual experience
and that the complexities of the internal representation of the self is
mediated by language.
Experimental psychologist Jeremy Skipper hypothesizes that lan-
guage, with an emphasis on inner speech, generates and sustains self-
awareness, that is, higher-order consciousness. He develops a “HOLIS-
TIC” model of neurobiology of language, inner speech, and conscious-
ness. It involves a “core” set of inner speech production regions that take
on affective qualities, involving a largely unconscious dynamic “pe-
riphery,” distributed throughout the whole brain. He claims that the
“model constitutes a more parsimonious and complete account of the
neural correlates of consciousness’” (at least of self-consciousness)
(Skipper, 2022).
Ned Block points to a related distinction between consciousness and
cognition. Cognition doesn’t have to be linguistic, he says, because non-
34 Note that Terrence Deacon has two theories of consciousness on the Land-
scape: “Self-Organized Constraint and Emergence of Self” earlier (9.5.8) and
“Symbolic Communication” here. This is not an error; nor does it imply that the
two cannot be woven together. Rather, it recognizes that, at this time, the two
are sufficiently different, and sufficiently interesting, to warrant their separate
locations.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
79
linguistic animals have some cognition. But then there are animals that
seem to have little or no cognition, just perception. Block concludes,
“We can see consciousness at its purest in perceptual consciousness, and
it has nothing to do, or little to do, with language” (Block, 2014).
While the overwhelming contemporary consensus is that con-
sciousness does not require language, human consciousness is obviously
and fundamentally affected or even framed by language. We explore
several approaches to the consciousness-language nexus.
9.9.1. Chomsky’s language and consciousness
Philosopher and linguist Noam Chomsky revolutionized the theory
of language, and although language-related theory of consciousness has
not been a focus of his contributions, its relevance remains. Chomsky
famously posited linguistic capacity, especially syntactic knowledge, as
at least partially innate and mostly (if not entirely) unique to human
beings. Thus, language acquisition in all human children is somewhat
instinctual and surprisingly rapid, conditioned by language-specific
features of diverse languages. Chomsky labels this core set of inherited
grammatical rules “universal grammar” and characterizes these inborn,
subconscious capabilities as “deep structure”.
Does Chomsky’s universal grammar with its deep structure carry
implications for consciousness? How does Chomsky approach the hard
problem of phenomenal consciousness? His views are complex, not
easily categorized (Section: Chomsky, 2022a, 2022b; Feser, 2010,
2022b).
Chomsky is an aggressive critic of behaviorism—it makes no sense,
he says, to study internal phenomena by observing external manifesta-
tions. The study of language is entirely inconsistent with behaviorist
principles. “Nothing there,” he says. To understand it, one must examine
internal processes. Thus, the connection between the deep structure of
language and the essence of consciousness.
Chomsky is also a critic of the hard problem, labeling it a “pseudo-
problem.” Some questions, by their simple structures, are not real
questions, he says, in that there is no logical way to answer them. His
example question “Why do things happen?” cannot be answered in the
general, while a similar-sounding question, say, “Why did this earth-
quake happen?” can be answered in the specific. Chomsky believes that
the hard problem of consciousness is an example of the former and
therefore is not a genuine question (while the “easy” problems of con-
sciousness, discovering neural correlates, are examples of the latter).
Exemplifying Chomsky’s unorthodox approach to consciousness,
even though he commits to a materialism/physicalism ontology that the
mind is generated only in the brain, rather than deflating the ontological
status of the mental, his contrarian position is to challenge the onto-
logical status of the physical—arguing that science does not know what
matter really is. To Chomsky, matter, not mental, is the main mystery.
As Chomsky says, “The mind-body problem can be posed sensibly
only insofar as we have a definite conception of body. If we have no such
definite and fixed conception, we cannot ask whether some phenomena
fall beyond its range” (Chomsky, 1987). Moreover, “The mind-body
problem can therefore not even be formulated. The problem cannot be
solved, because there is no clear way to state it. Unless someone pro-
poses a definite concept of body, we cannot ask whether some phe-
nomena exceed its bounds.”
As for clarifying the concept of the body, the physical, matter,
Chomsky states, “the material world is whatever we discover it to be,
with whatever properties it must be assumed to have for the purposes of
explanatory theory. Any intelligible theory that offers genuine expla-
nations and that can be assimilated to the core notions of physics be-
comes part of the theory of the material world, part of our account of
body.”
To Chomsky, a mechanical model of the world, developed in early
modern philosophy and inchoate science, could never account for as-
pects of the mental. Thus, while he understands Descartes’ motivation to
postulate a separate, nonphysical “thinking substance,” he rejects Des-
cartes’ classic dualism and trains his analytic guns on the mechanical
model in particular and on matter in general.
Chomsky feels no pressure to devise his own theory of consciousness.
If anything, he shuns grand solutions. “There seems to be no coherent
doctrine of materialism and metaphysical naturalism, no issue of elim-
inativism, no mind-body problem (Chomsky, 2020). In short, as Edward
Feser notes, “if the problem has no clear content, neither do any of the
solutions to it” (Feser, 2022b). Chomsky is content to allow science to do
its work, advancing knowledge of the brain and of the mind, leaving to
the future the construction of proper theories of consciousness irre-
spective of current notions of the physical and matter.
One may infer that Chomsky contemplates an expanded view of the
physical, with matter having features now unknown, which then would
“naturally” subsume the mental. (Note: Chomsky rejects panpsychism.)
However, in an overarching sense, he remains unsure whether human
beings have the capacity to solve what he believes are genuine mysteries
about the nature of reality, but he is also unsure whether consciousness
will prove to be an ultimate mystery.
9.9.2. Searle’s language and consciousness
To philosopher John Searle, language is crucial for consciousness,
just as consciousness is crucial for language, because much of our con-
sciousness is shaped by language and because the parts of language that
are most important to us are precisely those that are conscious (Searle,
2014b).
Searle contrasts human and animal consciousness: “My dogs have a
kind of consciousness which is incredibly rich. They can smell things I
can’t smell and they have a kind of inner life that I don’t have, but all the
same, there are all kinds of conscious experiences they simply cannot
have. My doggy lying there may be thinking about chasing other dogs
but he’s not thinking about doing his income tax or writing his next
poem or figuring out how he’s going to have a better summer vacation
next year.”
Searle stresses how language gives us enormous power in shaping
consciousness. A favorite quotation is from the French philosopher La
Rochefoucauld: “Very few people would ever fall in love if they never
read about it.” Searle’s point is that language shapes experience; there
are all kinds of experiences you just can’t have without language.
As for how language and consciousness articulate and developed
over time, Searle envisions an evolutionary “boot-strapping effect.” It
starts off with pre-linguistic consciousness, and then develops linguistic
meaning and communication, which enrich consciousness. The result is
an elaborate structure of language, which makes for a more elaborate
structure of consciousness, which then enables you to enrich your lan-
guage. There is a continuous reinforcing and compound effect (Searle,
2014b).
Non-linguistic animals can’t do this, Searle continues: “My doggie
can think somebody is at the door, but he cannot think I wish 17 people
were at the door, or I hope we get more people at the door next week.
Because to do that, he has got to be able to shuffle the symbols in a way
that human beings can with their inner syntax.”
Although animals do not form or express their beliefs in a symbolic
language, Searle attributes to them intentional states, and because
intentional states require consciousness, it follows that consciousness
does not require symbolic language. He cites as evidence that animals
“correct their beliefs all the time on the basis of their perceptions”
(Searle, 2002; Proust, 2003).
9.9.3. Koch’s consciousness does not depend on language
Neuroscientist Christof Koch asserts without ambiguity, “con-
sciousness doesn’t depend on language,” and he offers vivid clinical
cases of brain trauma or insult where language is obviously lost and
consciousness is obviously retained. Koch is especially exercised by the
claim that “only humans experience anything,” that other animals have
no sentience, a belief he calls “preposterous, a remnant of an atavistic
desire to be the one species of singular importance to the universe at
large. Far more reasonable and compatible with all known facts is the
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
80
assumption that we share the experience of life with all mammals”
(Koch, 2019).
Koch recounts and rejects how “Many classical scholars assign to
language the role of kingmaker when it comes to consciousness. That is,
language use is thought to either directly enable consciousness or to be
one of the signature behaviors associated with consciousness.” He con-
cludes, “language contributes massively to the way we experience the
world, in particular to our sense of the self as our narrative center in the
past and present. But our basic experience of the world does not depend
on it” (Koch, 2019).
9.9.4. Smith’s language as classifier of consciousness
Philosopher Barry Smith states that while we think of consciousness
as “moments of experience,” the way we capture what’s similar or
different in our experiences over time is via language. The “passing
show,” he says, “gets assembled into larger, more meaningful groups
when we use language to classify and categorize.” How do we do this?
How do we connect up these bits of consciousness with something sta-
ble? How do we classify the world, not just our own experience, and
communicable between experiencers? The answer is language, he says,
which he calls a species-specific property of human beings. With lan-
guage, we codify our own experience, represent the content of our own
minds, and compare it with the contents of other minds (Smith, 2012).
Distinguishing consciousness from language, Smith tells of someone
who lost all of their words for fruit and vegetables, and only those words.
They could use language normally and they had conscious awareness of
fruits and vegetables, but they could not use, pronounce or even
recognize words for fruit and vegetables. “It’s as if a whole shelf of
meanings had been taken away.”
Smith relates grades of consciousness to grades of language. One can
lose the word for an object but can still recognize the object (a form of
aphasia). Deeper, one can not only lose the word as a piece of sound
representing an object, but also not recognize the object either and lose
the whole meaning (a form of agnosia). He describes stroke patients
who, for example, can’t use the word “glove”. “What is that?” “Can’t
say.” Perhaps just the word is missing, because if they are asked, “Is
there a glove on the table?”, they answer, “Yes.” But other stroke pa-
tients answer, “I’ve no idea.” And if you show them a glove and ask,
“What’s this for?”, they say, “I don’t know, maybe it’s for keeping
coins.”
Smith suggests that words are ways that our visual consciousness
categorizes and structures the world. And perhaps a deeper loss of lan-
guage can lead to a dissolution of the very categories that we use to
classify our perceptual experiences. So, it’s not just that I can’t name or
categorize some object, but without language the actual conscious
experience of that object is radically different. If so, language is
responsible, at least in part, for organizing consciousness (Smith, 2012).
9.9.5. Jaynes’s breakdown of the bicameral mind
Psychohistorian Julian Jaynes’s 1976 book, The Origin of Conscious-
ness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind, proposes that consciousness,
particularly "the ability to introspect," is a learned behavior rooted in
language and culture and arises from metaphor; consciousness is neither
innate nor fundamental. To Jaynes, language plays a central role in
consciousness; language is “an organ of perception, not simply a means
of communication” (Jaynes, 1976; Bicameral Mind, 2024).
Jaynes defines consciousness idiosyncratically by distinguishing it
from sensory awareness and cognition; as such it more closely resembles
“introspective consciousness,” as he calls it, than it does phenomenal
consciousness, which is the target of this Landscape. Nonetheless, it is
helpful to work through Jaynes’s definitions and arguments, clarifying
how to avoid what could be confounding or muddled thinking about
consciousness. While Jaynes’s consciousness is not phenomenal con-
sciousness, his careful parsing of his definition gives insight into the
subtleties of the parsing process. Moreover, appreciating the flow of
Jaynes’s arguments as well as the substance of his claims sharpens our
view of the entire Landscape.
In Jaynes’s words, “Consciousness is not a simple matter and it
should not be spoken of as if it were.” He starts with what his con-
sciousness is not. (i) Not the “many things that the nervous system does
automatically for us. All the variety of perceptual constancies … all done
without any help from introspective consciousness.” (ii) Not what he
calls “preoptive” activities, such as how we sit, walk, move. “All these
are done without consciousness, unless we decide to be conscious of
them.” (iii) Not even speaking, where “the role of consciousness is more
interpolative than any constant companion to my words.” Conscious-
ness, he stresses, is not sense perception; it does not copy experience; it is
not necessary for learning; it is not even necessary for thinking or
reasoning; and it has only an arbitrary and functional location (Jaynes,
1987).
To Jaynes, consciousness, or what he refines as “subjective conscious
mind,” is an analog of the real world. “It is built up with a vocabulary or
lexical field whose terms are all metaphors or analogs of behavior in the
physical world … It allows us to short-cut behavioral processes and
arrive at more adequate decisions. Like mathematics, it is an operator
rather than a thing or a repository. And it is intimately bound with
volition and decision … Every word we use to refer to mental events is a
metaphor or analog of something in the behavioral world” (Jaynes,
1987).
Jaynes says that the primary feature of his consciousness is an
“associated spatial quality that, as a result of the language used to
describe such psychological events, becomes, with constant repetition,
this spatial quality of our consciousness or mind-space …. It is the space
which you preoptively are introspecting on at this very moment.”
The second most important feature of Jaynes’ consciousness is the
subject of the introspecting, the introspective “I”. Here Jaynes uses
analogy, which differs from metaphor in that the similarity is between
relationships rather than between things or actions. “As the body with its
sense organs (referred to as I) is to physical seeing,” he says, “so there
develops automatically an analog ‘I’ to relate to this mental kind of
‘seeing’ in mind-space.”
A third feature of Jaynes’ consciousness is narratization, “the
analogic simulation of actual behavior.” Consciousness, he says, “is
constantly fitting things into a story, putting a before and an after
around any event.” Other features of Jaynes’ consciousness include:
“concentration, the ‘inner’ analog of external perceptual attention; sup-
pression, by which we stop being conscious of annoying thoughts, the
analog of turning away from annoyances in the physical world; excerp-
tion, the analog of how we sense only one aspect of a thing at a time; and
consilience, the analog of perceptual assimilation.” Jaynes “essential
rule” is that “no operation goes on in consciousness that was not in
behavior first. All of these are learned analogs of external behavior”
(Jaynes, 1987).
Definition in hand, Jaynes asks, “When did all this ‘inner’ world
begin?”, which he calls “the most important watershed in our
discussion.”
Jaynes famously introduces the hypothesis of the "bicameral mind", a
non-conscious mentality supposedly prevalent in early humans that
featured a kind of auditory hallucinations. He argued that relatively
recent human ancestors as late as the ancient Greeks did not consider
emotions and desires as stemming from their own minds but rather as
the actions of external gods (Bicameral mentality, 2024).
Jaynes takes the oldest parts of the Iliad and asks, “Is there evidence
of consciousness?” The answer, he thinks, is no. “People are not sitting
down and making decisions. No one is. No one is introspecting. No one is
even reminiscing. It is a very different kind of world” (Jaynes, 1987).
Who, then, makes the decisions? Whenever a significant choice is to
be made, Jaynes suggests that “a voice comes in telling people what to
do. These voices are always and immediately obeyed. These voices are
called gods.” To Jaynes, this is the origin of gods. He regards them as
“auditory hallucinations” similar to, although not the same as, “the
voices heard by Joan of Arc or William Blake. Or similar to the voices
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
81
that modern schizophrenics hear.”
Jaynes coins the “bicameral mind” using the metaphor of a bicameral
legislature. It simply means that human mentality at this time was in two
parts, a decision-making part and a follower part, and neither part was
conscious in the sense in which Jaynes has described it (above) (Jaynes,
1987).
The theory posits that the human mind once operated in a state in
which cognitive functions were divided between one part of the brain
which appears to be "speaking", and a second part which listens and
obeys—the bicameral mind—and that the breakdown of this division
gave rise to consciousness in humans.
Jaynes supports his theory with historical texts and archaeological
evidence. He places the origin of consciousness around the 2nd mil-
lennium BCE and suggests that the transition from the bicameral mind to
consciousness was triggered by the breakdown of the bicameral system
of society (Bicameral mentality, 2024).
Jaynes describes bicameral societies as “strict and stable hierar-
chies,” including bicameral theocracies, where “everything went like
clockwork providing there was no real catastrophe or problem.” But
such a system is precarious, especially as society grows in population
and complexity, such that “given a time of social and political instability,
bicamerality can break down like a house of cards.” Whereas all sig-
nificant decisions previously had been based on the bicameral mind,
after its breakdown, after the hallucinated voices no longer told people
what to do, a new way of making decisions had to develop, which was a
kind of proto-consciousness (Jaynes, 1987).
There is an obvious, perhaps tempting, neurobiological correlate: the
two cerebral hemispheres, especially based on the pioneering split-brain
research of Michael Gazzaniga and Roger Sperry, which explained
functional brain lateralization and how the cerebral hemispheres
communicate with each another. Jaynes puts it simply: “the right
hemisphere was ‘talking’ to the left, and this was the bicameral mind”
(Jaynes, 1987).
Although Jaynes’s physicalist, deflationary theory of consciousness
continues to intrigue, it is not accepted by consciousness experts.
Nevertheless, Jaynes’s ideas and arguments can inform our view of the
Landscape.
9.9.6. Parrington’s language and tool-driven consciousness
Biologist John Parrington proposes that a qualitative leap in con-
sciousness—“human
self-conscious
awareness”—occurred
during
human evolution as “our capacity for language and our ability to
continually transform the world around us by designing and using tools”
transformed our brains. His challenge is to distinguish human language
and use of tools from analogous activities of animals, particularly other
primates, as contemporary research uncovers more complex animal
capacities (Parrington, 2023).
Regarding language, Parrington stresses the “highly distinctive
feature of human language” as “an interconnected system of abstract
symbols, linked together by grammar.” This is why, he says, “only
human beings are able to use language to convey complex ideas like
past, present and future, individual versus society, location in space and
even more abstract concepts.” (Parrington, 2023, p. 22). He defends his
view of human consciousness as language-dependent by stressing our
capacity for “inner speech, or more generally inner symbols, as central to
human thought” (Parrington, 2023, p. 55).
Regarding use of tools, Parrington argues that “tool use by other
species tends to be both occasional and also very limited in the type of
tools that are created. In contrast, a unique feature of our species is that
practically all of our interactions with the world are through tools that
we have created.” Moreover, “we are continually in a process of
inventing new types of tools and technologies” (Parrington, 2023, p. 19).
Parrington’s theory focuses on human brains, which are “not just
much bigger than those of other primates, but radically different in
structure and function” (a claim that hangs on “radically”) (Parrington,
2023, p. 20). He references different brain regions, highlighting the
cerebellum, long thought limited to coordinating repetitive movements
but now shown to play a role in human creativity and imagination
(Parrington, 2023, p. 47), and the prefrontal cortex, greatly expanded in
humans, the locus of reasoning, planning, decision making, control of
social behavior and some aspects of language, all of which relate to
human uniqueness (Parrington, 2023, p. 126). He has brain waves of
different frequencies conveying specific sensory signals and combining
together into a unified conscious whole, thus explaining how we bind
together different aspects of experience into a seamless experience
(Parrington, 2023, p. 19).
Parrington argues that “the effect of language and other cultural
tools” have transformed human consciousness, which “provides another
level of binding.” This surely means, he says, that “our sense of self is not
an illusion, but rather a very real phenomenon based on the binding role
of brain waves and the extra element of unity based on conceptual
thought” (Parrington, 2023, p. 147). Rejecting what he calls “outdated
models of the brain as a hard-wired circuit diagram,” he argues that
meaning is created within our heads through a dynamic interaction of
oscillating brain waves.
Parrington believes that “in some ways” he has addressed the hard
problem and “hopefully demonstrated that there is nothing magical
about human consciousness” (Parrington, 2023, p. 196). He frames his
theory, as he must, within an evolutionary context, seeking to explain
inner speech, thought, and self-conscious awareness in terms of the
evolved neural circuitry that undergirds these uniquely human capac-
ities, especially as manifest in language and tools. While Parrington’s
goal, as Susan Blackmore puts it, is to develop “a material explanation of
human consciousness”—and “he has done a great job of exploring ma-
terial explanations of thought, perception, self-representation and
behavioral control”—but none of this, Blackmore concludes, “gets at the
deeper questions about subjective experience” (Blackmore, 2023).
9.10. Phylogenetic evolution
Phylogenetic Evolution, the phylogenetic evolution of consciousness,
at first blush, is not a specific theory of consciousness per se. Rather, it is
recruited as the mechanistic process for many (but not all) of the the-
ories on the Landscape. Yet, is there a sense in which phylogenetic
evolution can become a prime explanation in its own right?
Certainly, according to Dennett (9.10.1), LeDoux (9.10.2) and
Ginsburg/Jablonka (9.10.3), consciousness exemplifies Theodosius
Dobzhansky famous adage, "Nothing in biology makes sense except in
the light of evolution” (Dobzhansky, 1973).
Neuroscientists and writers Ogi Ogas and Sai Gaddam present a step-
by-step simulation of how evolution produced consciousness. It is a tale
of eighteen “increasingly intelligent minds,” as they say, from the simple
stimulus-response of microbes interacting with their environments to
the limitless creativity of humankind (and beyond). Leveraging the
“resonance” theories of Stephen Grossberg (9.4.2), their mentor, they
tell a story of what each “new” mind could do that previous minds could
not (Ogas and Gaddam, 2022).
To physicist Lawrence Krauss, “consciousness is a slippery quality
because it exists on a spectrum in the evolutionary development of life
that is very difficult to measure or quantify” (Krauss, 2023, p. 195). He
stresses “the phenomenon of consciousness is the one area I know of in
science where the forefront discussions seem to be made by philosophers
equally as often as they are made by experimental cognitive scientists,”
which, he says softly, is “an indication of a science in its early stages”
(Krauss, 2023, pp. 193–194).
Amidst the surfeit of competing neurobiological theories, Krauss is
most comfortable pursuing “the possible distinct evolutionary advan-
tages that consciousness might endow humans with.” He follows the
thread that “feelings emerged as ever more complex systems evolved to
incorporate higher-order cognitive processing to issues of survival and
homeostasis” (9.5.). Consciousness, through introspection, he says,
“could build on the nervous system monitoring of basic internal body
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
82
conditions to produce novel, rather than innate, survival strategies. The
ability to use internal representations of goals, whether from cognitive
maps or stored memories, to flexibly respond to the changing environ-
mental conditions, was a huge evolutionary leap, and has been noted to
probably exist only in some mammals and perhaps in birds” (Krauss,
2023, pp. 211–212).
Philosophers David Buller and Valarie Hardcastle offer an alternative
to the strong evolutionary claim that “the mind contains ‘hundreds or
thousands’ of ‘genetically specified’ modules, which are evolutionary
adaptations for their cognitive functions.” They argue that “while the
adult human mind/brain typically contains a degree of modularization,
its ‘modules’ are neither genetically specified nor evolutionary adapta-
tions. Rather, they result from the brain’s developmental plasticity,
which allows environmental task demands a large role in shaping the
brain’s information-processing structures.” They maintain that “the
brain’s developmental plasticity is our fundamental psychological
adaptation, and the ‘modules’ that result from it are adaptive responses
to local conditions, not past evolutionary environments” (Buller and
Hardcastle, 2000).
Questions remain. What creatures are conscious and to what degree?
How low on the phylogenetic scale must one descend to wink out any-
thing resembling human consciousness? For example, does an octopus
have phenomenal consciousness? Philosopher (and scuba-diver) Peter
Godfrey-Smith not only affirms octopus higher intelligence, he also
traces the evolution of mental properties in the primordial seas, claiming
that “evolution built minds not once but at least twice (Godfrey-Smith,
2016).
Appreciating Godfrey-Smith’s work, Carlo Rovelli uses the “complex
intellectual abilities” of octopuses as “a valuable case study” of con-
sciousness. In recent decades, he observes, “the phrase ‘the problem of
the nature of consciousness’ has taken the place of what in the past used
to be the problem of the meaning of soul, spirit, subjectivity, intelli-
gence, perception, understanding, existing in the first person, being
aware of a self …” Consciousness is neurobiological, Rovelli asserts, and
one way to tackle the issue is to observe our non-human cousins and
even octopuses, an extremely distant relative. The octopus, he offers, “is
the extraterrestrial that we have been looking for in order to study a
possible independent realization of consciousness” (Rovelli, 2020).
Raymond Tallis questions the entire enterprise of assuming “the
[evolutionary] advantage of being a conscious organism rather than a
self-replicating bag of chemicals innocent of its own existence.” His
skeptical argument against “what seems like a no-brainer” is “not to start
near the end of the story, with complex, sophisticated organisms such as
higher mammals … [whose] life depends on conscious navigation
through the world.” No, he says, “we must begin at the beginning: by
asking, for example, what survival value is conferred on a photosensitive
cell in virtue of its organism being aware of the light incident upon it.
And the answer appears to be: ‘none.’” Tallis argues, “If there’s no
reason to believe that the sentience of primitive organisms would give
them an edge over the competition, there is no starting point for the
evolutionary journey to the sophisticated consciousness we see in higher
organisms like you and me.” The mystery of consciousness, he con-
cludes, “remains intact” (18.4) (Tallis, 2023).
Most experts, scientists and philosophers who study the evolution of
mind, support a gradual, incrementalistic theory of mental develop-
ment, much like Dennett, Godfrey-Smith, and Ogas/Gaddam. There are
dissenting voices: for example, Nicholas Humphrey (9.8.6) and perhaps
Noam Chomsky (9.9.1).
Here’s the point. In considering the multifarious theories on the
Landscape of Consciousness, one should overlay each theory with its
putative phylogenetic evolutionary development. Ask, “What was the
process that brought it about?”
9.10.1. Dennett’s evolution of minds
Daniel Dennett delights us with the wondrous and sometimes
counterintuitive
power
of
evolution
in
the
development
of
consciousness (or, more generally, “minds”), notably in his psychohis-
tory journey, From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution of Minds
(Dennett, 2017). Even if one doesn’t wholly subscribe to Dennett’s own
explanations of consciousness (9.2.4)—which I don’t—everyone’s un-
derstanding of consciousness can be enriched by Dennett’s probative
and insightful way of thinking (Dennett, 2007, 2023a, 2023b). Dennett
describes evolution as a “universal acid” that “eats through just about
every traditional concept, revolutionizing world-views” (Dennett,
1995).
“How come there are minds?” is Dennett’s big evolutionary question,
“And how is it possible for minds to ask and answer this question?” His
short answer is that “minds evolved and created thinking tools that
eventually enabled minds to know how minds evolved, and even to
know how these tools enabled them to know what minds are … We
know there are bacteria; dogs don’t; dolphins don’t; chimpanzees don’t.
Even bacteria don’t know there are bacteria. Our minds are different. It
takes thinking tools to understand what bacteria are, and we’re the only
species (so far) endowed with an elaborate kit of thinking tools” (Den-
nett, 2017).
Dennett reflects that he has been struggling through the “thickets and
quagmires” of the mind question for over fifty years, and he has found a
path, built on evolution, that “takes us all the way to a satisfactory—and
satisfying—account of how the ‘magic’ of our minds is accomplished
without any magic, but it is neither straight nor easy” (Dennett, 2017).
9.10.2. LeDoux’s deep roots of consciousness
Neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux argues that the key to understanding
human consciousness and behavior lies in viewing evolution through the
prism of the first living organisms. He tracks the evolutionary timeline to
show how even the earliest single-cell organisms had to solve the same
problems we and our cells have to solve, and how the evolution of
nervous systems enhanced the ability of organisms to survive and thrive
and have brought about the emergence of consciousness (LeDoux,
2019).
Motivated by his long-standing interest in how organisms detect and
respond to danger, LeDoux found in evolution the “deep roots” of human
abilities, hence the “deep roots” of consciousness, which “can be traced
back to the beginning of life.” LeDoux argues that what we have
inherited from our long chain of biological ancestors is not a fear circuit
but rather “a defensive survival circuit that detects threats, and in
response, initiates defensive survival behaviours and supporting physi-
ological adjustments.” Fear, on the other hand, from LeDoux perspec-
tive, is a recent expression of cortical cognitive circuits. Danger and
survival have a deep history; consciousness, a shallower one (LeDoux,
2021).
9.10.3. Ginsburg and Jablonka’s associative learning during evolution
Neurobiologist Simona Ginsburg and evolutionary theorist Eva
Jablonka propose that learning during evolution has been “the driving
force” in the transition to basic or minimal consciousness. They identify
the evolutionary marker as “a complex form of associative learning,
which they term “unlimited associative learning” and which “enables an
organism to ascribe motivational value to a novel, compound, non-
reflex-inducing stimulus or action, and [to] use it as the basis for
future learning” (Ginsburg and Jablonka, 2019).
Associative learning, Ginsburg and Jablonka argue, “drove the
Cambrian explosion and its massive diversification of organisms.” They
suggest that “consciousness can take many forms and is found even in
such animals as octopuses (who seem to express emotions by changing
color) and bees (who socialize with other bees)” (Ginsburg and
Jablonka, 2022). As for the evolutionary transition to human rationality,
they propose “symbolic language as a similar type of marker” (Ginsburg
and Jablonka, 2019).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
83
9.10.4. Cleeremans and Tallon-Baudry’s phenomenal experience has
functional value
Cleeremans and Tallon-Baudry propose that “subject-level experi-
ence—’What it feels like’—is endowed with intrinsic value, and it is
precisely the value agents associate with their experiences that explains
why they do certain things and avoid others.” Because experiences have
value and guide behavior, they argue, “consciousness has a function”
and that under “this hypothesis of ‘phenomenal worthiness’ … conscious
agents ‘experience’ things and ‘care’ about those experiences” (Cleere-
mans and Tallon-Baudry, 2022).
The authors note that “the function of consciousness” has been
“addressed mostly by philosophers,” yet “surprisingly few things have
been written about [it] … in the neuroscientific or psychological liter-
ature.” The reason, they surmise, is the “classical view” that “subjective
experience is a mere epiphenomenon that affords no functional advan-
tage." They reject such “consciousness inessentialism” by appealing to
“how the concept of value has been approached in decision-making,
emotion research and consciousness research” and by arguing that
“phenomenal consciousness has intrinsic value”—such as it being “the
central drive for the discovery and creation of new behaviours.” They
conclude that consciousness “must have a function” (Cleeremans and
Tallon-Baudry, 2022).
Under their hypothesis, “consciousness would have evolved and
been selected because it adds an important degree of freedom to the
machinery of reward-based behaviour: behaviour that seems purpose-
less from a purely functional perspective nevertheless has intrinsic
value. But this, crucially, only holds when associated with conscious
experience.” Phenomenal experience, they speculate, “might act as a
mental currency of sorts, which not only endows conscious mental states
with intrinsic value but also makes it possible for conscious agents to
compare vastly different experiences in a common subject-centered
space”—a feature, they claim, that “readily explains the fact that con-
sciousness is ‘unified.’” They offer the “phenomenal worthiness hy-
pothesis” as a way to make “the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness more
tractable, since it can then be reduced to a problem about function”—an
offering unlikely to persuade nonmaterialists (Cleeremans and
Tallon-Baudry, 2022).
9.10.5. Andrew’s consciousness without complex brains
Philosopher Kristin Andrews, an expert on animal minds, argues that
progress in consciousness studies has been hampered by prevailing
conventional wisdom that for an organism to be conscious, a complex
brain is required. She advocates moving “past a focus on complex
mammalian brains to study the behavior of ‘simpler’ animals” (Andrews,
2023).
In forming her argument, Andrews rehearses how Crick and Koch
helped turn consciousness studies into a real science by supposing that
“higher mammals” possess some essential features of consciousness
(9.2.2), by setting aside the still-common Cartesian view that language is
needed for conscious experience, and by assuming that a nervous system
is necessary for consciousness. She recruits the Cambridge Declaration
on Consciousness, which states that “there is sufficient evidence to
conclude that ‘all mammals and birds, and many other creatures,
including octopuses’ experience conscious states.” The Declaration, she
notes, identifies five consciousness markers (not all of which would be
necessary): “homologous brain circuits; artificial stimulation of brain
regions causing similar behaviours and emotional expressions in
humans and other animals; neural circuits supporting behavioural/
electrophysical states of attentiveness, sleep and decision-making;
mirror self-recognition; and similar impacts of hallucinogenic drugs
across species” (Andrews, 2023).
But Andrews posits that “emphasis on the neurological … may be
holding the science back,” and that animal research suggests “multiple
realizability—the view that mental capacities can be instantiated by very
different physical systems.” If neuroscience looks only at slightly
different physical systems (say, just other primates or even mammals),
she says, “we may be overlooking the key piece to the consciousness
puzzle.”
Andrews asks, “What might we learn if our anthropocentrism didn’t
lead us to focus on the brain as the relevant part of physiology needed for
consciousness, but instead led us to examine the behaviours that are
associated with experiences?” She advocates studying “the nature of
consciousness by looking at bees, octopuses and worms as research
subjects. All these animals have a robust profile of behaviours that
warrant the hypothesis that they are conscious. Moving away from
painful stimuli, learning the location of desirable nutrients, and seeking
out what is needed for reproduction is something we share widely with
other animals.” By studying simple animals, she offers, we can simplify
research on consciousness (Andrews, 2023).
Andrews likens studying consciousness to studying the origin of life
on earth and searching for life on other planets. For each, there is only
one confirmed instance. It’s the “N = 1 problem.” “If we study only one
evolved instance of consciousness (our own),” she says, “we will be
unable to disentangle the contingent and dispensable from the essential
and indispensable.” She offers “good news” in that “consciousness sci-
ence, unlike the search for extraterrestrial life, can break out of its N = 1
problem using other cases from our own planet.” Typically, conscious-
ness scientists study other primates (e.g., macaque monkeys) and, to a
lesser extent, other mammals, such as rats. “But the N = 1 problem still
bites here. Because the common ancestor of the primates was very
probably conscious, as indeed was the common ancestor of all
mammals—we are still looking at the same evolved instance (just a
different variant of it). To find independently evolved instances of
consciousness, we really need to look to much more distant branches of
the tree of life” (Andrews and Birch, 2023).
Andrews speculates that “sentience has evolved only three times:
once in the arthropods (including crustaceans and insects), once in the
cephalopods (including octopuses) and once in the vertebrates.” But she
cannot rule out “the possibility that the last common ancestor of
humans, bees and octopuses, which was a tiny worm-like creature that
lived more than 500 million years ago, was itself sentient—and that
therefore sentience has evolved only once on Earth.”
In either case, she argues, “If a marker-based approach does start
pointing towards sentience being present in our worm-like last common
ancestor, we would have evidence against current theories that rely on a
close relationship between sentience and special brain regions adapted
for integrating information, like the cerebral cortex in humans. We
would have grounds to suspect that many features often said to be
essential to sentience are actually dispensable” (Andrews and Birch,
2023). Conversely, it could mean that sentience is related to some un-
known feature(s).
To Andrews, the philosophy of animal minds addresses profound
questions about the nature of mind as they cut across animal cognition
and philosophy of mind. Key topics include the evolution of con-
sciousness, tool use in animals, animal culture, mental representation,
belief, communication, theory of mind, animal ethics, and moral psy-
chology (Andrews, 2020a). Andrews outlines “the scientific benefits of
treating animals as sentient research participants who come from their
own social contexts” (Andrews, 2020b).
Andrews concludes: “Just as Crick and Koch pushed back on the
popular view of their time that language is needed for consciousness,
today we should push back on the popular view of our time that a
complex brain is needed for consciousness.” She also speculates: “If we
recognize that our starting assumptions are open to revision and allow
them to change with new scientific discoveries, we may find new puzzle
pieces, making the hard problem a whole lot easier” (Andrews, 2023).
In essence, then, Andrews reverses the traditional “neurocentric”
argument of consciousness. Whereas the common assumption is that
consciousness is (somehow) related to the complexity of the nervous
system, but because all neurobiological advances, collectively, have not
progressed in solving the hard problem, then perhaps the common
assumption is not correct and the generation of consciousness can be
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
84
found outside the nervous system. Thus, rather than assuming that or-
ganisms without complex nervous systems cannot be conscious, perhaps
a radical new approach might be to consider that these organisms are (in
a way) conscious and focus research on how such “lower” or “primitive”
consciousness might come about.
Finally, regarding our current obsession with discerning AI
sentience, Andrews claims that “without a deep understanding of the
variety of animal minds on this planet, we will almost certainly fail”
(Andrews and Birch, 2023).
Neuroscience/consciousness writer Annaka Harris goes further,
questioning our potentially false but deeply ingrained intuition that
“systems that act like us are conscious, and those that don’t are not.”
Plants and philosophical zombies, she says, indicate that this human-
centric intuition “has no real foundation.” (A. Harris, 2020, 2019).
Consciousness may not even require a brain (A. Harris, 2022).
9.10.6. Reber’s cellular basis of consciousness
Cognitive psychologist Arthur Reber dubs his theory of the origins of
mind and consciousness the Cellular Basis of Consciousness (CBC),
arguing that “sentience emerged with life itself.” He states, “The most
primitive unicellular species of bacteria are conscious, though it is a
sentience of a primitive kind. They have minds, though they are tiny and
limited in scope.” He rejects that “minds are computational and can be
captured by an artificial intelligence.” He develops CBC using standard
models of evolutionary biology, leveraging the “remarkable repertoire
of single-celled species that micro- and cell-biologists have discovered …
Bacteria, for example, have sophisticated sensory and perceptual sys-
tems, learn, form memories, make decisions based on information about
their environment relative to internal metabolic states, communicate
with each other, and even show a primitive form of altruism.” All such
functions, Reber contends, “are indicators of sentience” (Reber, 2016,
2018).
Reber’s model is based on a simple, radical axiom: “Mind and con-
sciousness are not unique features of human brains. They are grounded
in inherent features present in simpler forms in virtually every species.
Any organism with flexible cell walls, a sensitivity to its surrounds and
the capacity for locomotion will possess the biological foundations of
mind and consciousness.” In other words, “subjectivity is an inherent
feature of particular kinds of organic form. Experiential states, including
those denoted as ‘mind’ and ‘consciousness,’ are present in the most
primitive species” (Reber, 2016).
Reber founds his model on several principles: “Complexity has its
roots in simplicity. Evolution has a pyramidal schema. Older forms and
functions lie at the base, the more recently evolved ones toward the
zenith …. In virtue of the nature of pyramidal systems, the older
structures and the behaviors and processes that utilize them will be
relatively stable, showing less individual-to-individual and species-to-
species variation. They will also, in virtue of their foundational status,
be robust and less likely to be lost. Adaptive forms and functions are not
jettisoned; they are modified and, if the selection processes are effective,
they will become more complex and capable of greater behavioral and
mental flexibility and power” (Reber, 2016).
Reber claims that his model has several conceptual and empirical
virtues, among them: “(a) it (re)solves the problem of how minds are
created by brains—the "Hard Problem"—by showing that the apparent
difficulty results from a category error; (b) it redirects the search for the
origins of mind from complex neural structures to foundational biome-
chanical ones; and (c) it reformulates the long-term research focus from
looking for ‘miracle moments’ where a brain is suddenly capable of
making a mind to discovering how complex and sophisticated cognitive,
emotional and behavioral functions evolve from more primitive ones”
(Reber, 2016).
In addressing the hard problem, Reber argues that the reason it looks
“hard” is “because it assumes that there is some ‘added’ element that
comes from having a mind.” However, he says, “from the CBC
perspective the answer is easily expressed. Organisms have minds, or the
precursors of what we from our philosophy of mind perspective think of
as minds, because they are an inherent component of organic form.
What gets ‘added’ isn’t ontologically novel; it’s a gradual accretion of
functions that are layered over and interlock with pre-existing ones”
(Reber, 2016).
In the CBC framework, “All experience is mental. All organisms that
experience have minds, all have consciousness.” Reber contends that
this way of thinking repositions the problem, from how brains create
consciousness (i.e., the hard problem) to how all experience is con-
sciousness. “Instead of trying to grasp the neuro-complexities in brains
that give rise to minds, we can redirect the focus toward understanding
how particular kinds of basic, primitive organic forms came to have the
bio-sensitivity that is the foundation of subjectivity.” Reber recognizes
that “this argument requires a commitment to a biological reduc-
tionism.” It would also undermine Functionalism (9.1.3) in that mental
states would be “intrinsically hardware dependent” (Reber, 2016).
9.10.7. Feinberg and Mallatt’s ancient origins of consciousness
Neurologist/psychiatrist Todd Feinberg and evolutionary biologist
Jon Mallatt propose that consciousness appeared much earlier in
evolutionary history than is commonly assumed, and therefore all ver-
tebrates and perhaps even some invertebrates are conscious. By
assembling a list of the biological and neurobiological features that seem
responsible for consciousness, and by juxtaposing the fossil record of
evolution, the authors argue that about 520–560 million years ago, “the
great ‘Cambrian explosion’ of animal diversity produced the first com-
plex brains, which were accompanied by the first appearance of con-
sciousness; simple reflexive behaviors evolved into a unified inner world
of subjective experiences” (Fineberg and Mallatt, 2016).
Doing what they call “neuroevolution,” Feinberg and Mallatt put
forth the even more unconventional idea that the origin of consciousness
goes back to the origin of life, in that single-cell creatures respond to
stimuli from the environment, whether attracted to food sources or
repelled by harmful chemicals. The authors call this process “sensory
consciousness” [but which others may call stimulus-response patterns
unworthy of the “consciousness” appellation]. In addition, the cell
membrane distinguishes self from non-self, which becomes another
baby step on the long evolutionary journey to human consciousness. A
crucial developmental step, they say, was the evolution of “hidden
layers” of clusters of intermediary nerve cells that process and relay
internal signals between sensory-input and motor-output nerve cells.
Driven by evolutionary pressures, these clusters would go on to evolve
into primitive and then more complex brains (Fineberg and Mallatt,
2016; Rose, 2017).
If indeed these were the historical facts, it would naturally follow
that “all vertebrates are and have always been conscious—not just
humans and other mammals, but also every fish, reptile, amphibian, and
bird.” Moreover, Feinberg and Mallatt find that many inverte-
brates—arthropods (including insects and probably crustaceans) and
cephalopods (including the octopus)—"meet many of the criteria for
consciousness.” Their proposal challenges standard-model theory that
“consciousness evolved simultaneously but independently in the first
vertebrates and possibly arthropods more than half a billion years ago.”
Combining evolutionary, neurobiological, and philosophical approaches
enables Feinberg and Mallatt to cast a broader group of animals that are
conscious, though it is less clear how their theory offers—as the mar-
keting claims, the authors less so—“an original solution to the ‘hard
problem’ of consciousness” (Fineberg and Mallatt, 2016).
9.10.8. Levin’s technological approach to mind everywhere
Developmental and synthetic biologist Michael Levin introduces “a
framework for understanding and manipulating cognition in uncon-
ventional substrates,” which he calls ‘TAME—Technological Approach
to Mind Everywhere.” He asserts that creating “novel embodied cogni-
tive systems (otherwise known as minds) in a very wide variety of
chimeric architectures combining evolved and designed material and
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
85
software”—via synthetic biology and bioengineering—“are disrupting
familiar concepts in the philosophy of mind, and require new ways of
thinking about and comparing truly diverse intelligences, whose
composition and origin are not like any of the available natural model
species.” TAME, Levin says, “formalizes a non-binary (continuous),
empirically-based approach to strongly embodied agency,” and it
“provides a natural way to think about animal sentience as an instance of
collective intelligence of cell groups, arising from dynamics that mani-
fest in similar ways in numerous other substrates” (Levin, 2022).
By focusing on cognitive function, not on phenomenal or access
consciousness, Levin takes “TAME’s view of sentience as fundamentally
tied to goal-directed activity,” noting carefully that “only some aspects
of which can be studied via third-person approaches.” Provisionally,
Levin suggests that consciousness “comes in degrees and kinds (is not
binary),” for the same reasons he argues for continuity of cognition: “if
consciousness is fundamentally embodied, the plasticity and gradual
malleability of bodies suggest that it is a strong requirement for pro-
ponents of phase transitions to specify what kind of ‘atomic’ (not further
divisible) bodily change makes for a qualitative shift in capacity con-
sciousness” (Levin, 2022).
Although Levin takes the null or default hypothesis to be the rela-
tively smooth continuity of consciousness across species and phyloge-
netically, he hedges that “the TAME framework is not incompatible with
novel discoveries about sharp phase transitions.” He points to future,
radical brain-computer interfaces in human patients as “perhaps one
avenue where a subject undergoing such a change can convince them-
selves, and perhaps others, that a qualitative, not continuous, change in
their consciousness had occurred.”
In a radical implication of TAME, Levin argues that “while
‘embodiment’ is critical for consciousness, it is not restricted to physical
bodies acting in 3D space, but also includes perception-action systems
working in all sorts of spaces.” This implies, he says, “counter to many
people’s intuitions, that systems that operate in morphogenetic, tran-
scriptional, and other spaces should also have some (if very minimal)
degree of consciousness. This in turn suggests that an agent, such as a
typical modern human, is really a patchwork of many diverse con-
sciousnesses, only one of which is usually capable of verbally reporting
its states (and, not surprisingly, given its limited access and self-
boundary, believes itself to be a unitary, sole owner of the body).”
Levin remains “skeptical about being able to say anything definitive
about consciousness per se (as distinct from correlates of consciousness)
from a 3rd-person, objective perspective.” Yet, he muses, “The devel-
opmental approach to the emergence of consciousness on short, onto-
genetic timescales complements the related question on phylogenetic
timescales, and is likely to be a key component of mature theories in this
field” (Levin, 2022).
9.10.9. No hard problem in William James’s psychology
Writer Tracy Witham argues that William James flipped the para-
digm in which the hard problem arises, because James viewed con-
sciousness through a problem he believed it solves by selecting for
adaptive responses to specific environmental situations (James, 1890).
Essentially, James believed that a brain complex enough to support a
proliferation of options for responding to environmental situations is
more likely to obscure than to identify the best option to use, unless that
brain also has a selection mechanism for choosing adaptive over less,
non-, and maladaptive options. But the question remains, Witham says,
whether consciousness is, at least, a good prima facie fit, to address what
can be called “the selection problem.”
The hypothesis that underlies James’s view, she says, is that con-
sciousness increases an organism’s fitness by “bringing … pressure to
bear in favor of those of its performances which make for the most
permanent interests of the brain’s owner …” (James, 1890, p. 140).
Specifically, the role James gave to consciousness must be under-
stood only in the context of the formation of de facto ends which he
believed form when preferred sensations are recalled in their absence
(James, 1890, p. 78). This context is crucial, because it is consciousness
that confers the preferences for some sensations over others and thereby
serves as the source of the ends. But to understand why James gave
consciousness that role, Witham says we need to understand his two--
word phrase, "cerebral reflex," (James, 1890, p. 80). which implies a
stimulus-and-response schema is the basis for the ends-and-means cou-
plings that form cerebral reflexes. However, there is a problem with the
implication. For this to work, ends must stand in for stimuli, arising in
interactions between organisms and their environments.
The problem is solved, Witham says, if consciousness just is what it
seems to be: the means by which we reflect on our interactions with our
environments to sense whether the interactions are favorable or not. So,
what consciousness seems to be fits James’s hypothesis perfectly, that its
role is to "bring … pressure to bear [in favor of] those of our perfor-
mances" that are adaptive. Reflective experience, in short, makes it
possible to identify experiences of our environmental interactions that
contain adaptive behaviors and retain them as cerebral reflexes for
future use. But then, as the means to solve the selection problem, con-
sciousness becomes an adaptive adaptation in the sense of being an
adaptation selecting for adaptive behaviors. And it does so by being,
indeed, what it seems to be: an adaptive adaptation that is a marvelous
source of solutions, not a confounding source of problems.
The critical question, however, is whether a zombie-like black box of
sufficient complexity could perform environmentally driven, fitness
enhancing, evolutionarily successful activities, and if so, why then the
radical advent of something so startlingly novel in the universe: inner
experience? In other words, while the question of why consciousness
was favored and selected by evolution is important, it is not the question
of what consciousness actually is, which of course is the hard problem.
10. Non-reductive physicalism
Non-Reductive Physicalism takes consciousness to be entirely phys-
ical, solely the product of biological brains, but mental states or prop-
erties are irreducibly distinct from physical states or properties such that
they cannot be entirely explained by physical laws, principles or dis-
coveries (in brains or otherwise) (Macdonald and Macdonald, 2019).
Non-reductive Physicalism was, in part, a response to conceptual
problems in the early identity theories of physicalism where mental
properties or kinds were literally the same thing as physical properties or
kinds. This was challenged by several conceptual conundrums: the
multiple realizability of the same mental properties or kinds by different
physical properties or kinds (Hilary Putnam); the intentional essence of
mental phenomena, which seems so radically different from physical
laws or things (Donald Davidson’s “Anomalous Monism,” 14.2); and the
apparent unbridgeable gap between physics and the special sciences
(Jerry Fodor) (Macdonald and Macdonald, 2019).
While mental states are generated entirely by physical states (of the
brain), non-reductive physicalism maintains that they are truly other
than physical; mental states are ontologically distinct.
This would seem to make Non-Reductive Physicalism a form of
property dualism (15.1) in that both recognize real mental states and yet
only one kind of substance, matter—but, as expected, some adherents of
each reject the claims of the other. If Non-Reductive Physicalism is
indeed a form of property dualism, it would be perhaps the predominant
contemporary kind.
A core mechanism of Non-Reductive Physicalism is emergence,
where novel properties at higher levels of integration are not discernible
(and perhaps not even predictable, ever) from all-you-can-know at lower
or more fundamental levels. A prime feature of Non-Reductive Physi-
calism is often “top-down causation,” where the content of conscious-
ness is causally efficacious—qualia can do real work (contra
Epiphenomenalism, 9.1.2).
Some Christian philosophers, such as Nancey Murphy (10.2), who
seek greater consonance between contemporary science and the Chris-
tian faith, look to Non-Reductive Physicalism as a nondualistic account
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
86
of the human person. It does not consider the "soul" an entity separable
from the body, such that scientific statements about the physical nature
of human beings would be referring to exactly the same entity as theo-
logical statements concerning the spiritual nature of human beings
(Brown et al., 1998). The structure of Non-Reductive Physicalism is said
to enhance the Judeo-Christian concept of “resurrection of the dead” as
opposed to what is said to be the non-Judeo-Christian doctrine of an
“immortal soul” (Van Inwagen, 1995).
On the other hand, Christian philosopher J.P. Moreland takes
dualism to be “the clear teaching of Scripture” that “overwhelmingly
sets forth a dichotomy of soul and body” and he decries those Christian
thinkers who deny this conclusion, especially adherents of Non-Reduc-
tive Physicalism (Moreland, 2014).
Philosopher Jaegwon Kim’s objections to Non-Reductive Physi-
calism, based on causal closure and overdetermination, highlight its
three principles: the irreducibility of the mental to the physical; some
version of mental-physical supervenience; and the causal efficaciousness
of mental states. The problem, according to Kim, is that when these three
commitments are combined, an inconsistency is generated that entails
the causal impotence of mental properties (Kim, 2024).
I’ve always been puzzled by Non-Reductive Physicalism in that I can
well understand how, under physicalism, consciousness is non-reductive
in practice, but how non-reductive in principle? Conversely, if indeed
consciousness is in principle non-reductive—impossible for science ever
to explain how it works in terms of fundamental physical con-
stituents—it would seem to require the ontological reality of non-
physical properties (at least by current boundaries), which would seem
to embed a contradiction. Or else, by what mechanisms could such
higher-level non-reducible “laws” work? Perhaps by something analo-
gous to quantum fields but operating at higher levels? Occam is sharp-
ening his Razor.
10.1. Ellis’s strong emergence and top-down causation
Mathematical physicist George Ellis approaches consciousness by
combining non-reductionist strong emergence and top-down causation
in the context of “possibility spaces” (Ellis, 2017a). While he calls con-
sciousness “the biggest unsolved problem in science,” he sees the larger
vision that consciousness transforms the nature of existence itself such
that existence is quite different than it might have been had there been
only nonconscious matter (Ellis, 2006).
Ellis begins with four kinds of entities, or “Worlds,” whose existence
requires explanation: matter and forces, consciousness, physical and
biological possibilities, and mathematical reality. An adequate expla-
nation of what exists, he says, must encompass all four kinds of entities,
in two forms: generic forms of the kinds of entities that might exist, and
specific instantiations of some of these possibilities that actually occur or
have occurred in the real universe. The first are possibilities, and the
second are actualizations of those possibilities (Ellis, 2015).
“Possibility spaces,” then, show what is and what is not possible for
entities of whatever kind we are discussing. For example, the possibility
space for classical physics is all possible states of the system; for quan-
tum physics, the state spaces for the system wave function are Hilbert
spaces.
For consciousness, possibility spaces include separate subspaces for
all possible thoughts, all possible qualia, all possible emotions—each
with its own character. Ellis says, “The rationale is always the same: if
these aspects of consciousness occur, then it is possible that they occur;
and that possibility was there long before they ever occurred, and so is
an abstract feature of the universe. The physical existence of brains
enables their potential existence to be actualized” (Ellis, 2015).
Ellis embeds his theory of consciousness in the presence and power of
strong emergence, where properties of a system are impossible to predict
in terms of the properties of its constituents, even in principle; and of
top-down causation, where higher hierarchical levels exert causal force
on lower levels, even though the higher levels are comprised only of the
lower levels. Strong emergence, according to Ellis, works throughout the
physical world, particularly in biology where the whole is more than just
the sum of its parts (Ellis, 2017b, 2019).
He explains that “emergence is possible because downward causa-
tion takes place right down to the lower physical levels, hence, argu-
ments from the alleged causal completeness of physics and
supervenience are wrong. Lower levels, including the underlying phys-
ical levels, are conscripted to higher level purposes; the higher levels are
thereby causally effective, so strong emergence occurs. No violation of
physical laws is implied. The key point is that outcomes of universally
applicable generic physical laws depend on the context when applied in
specific real world biological situations … including the brain” (Ellis,
2019).
Continuing to focus on emergence and downward causation, Ellis
“considers how a classification of causal effects as comprising efficient,
formal, material, and final causation can provide a useful understanding
of how emergence takes place in biology and technology, with formal,
material, and final causation all including cases of downward causation;
they each occur in both synchronic and diachronic forms.” Taken
together, he says, the four causal effects “underlie why all emergent
levels in the hierarchy of emergence have causal powers (which is No-
ble’s principle of biological relativity) and so why causal closure only
occurs when the upward and downward interactions between all
emergent levels are taken into account, contra to claims that some un-
derlying physics level is by itself causality complete” A key feature, Ellis
adds, is that “stochasticity at the molecular level plays an important role
in enabling agency to emerge, underlying the possibility of final
causation occurring in these contexts” (Ellis, 2023).
Ellis’s two points here, if veridical and representing reality, would
have extraordinary impact on theories of consciousness, and the two
bear repeating: (i) emergence has causal powers at all levels in biology,
and (ii) top-down causation as well as bottom-up causation is necessary
for causal closure. At once, almost every Materialism Theory—maybe
every Materialism Theory (more than 90 at last count)—would be shown
insufficient to explain consciousness (even if one or more were still
necessary to do so).
Ellis highlights questions that he claims reductionists cannot answer:
“Reductionists cannot answer why strong emergence (unitary, branch-
ing, and logical) is possible, and in particular why abstract entities such
as thoughts and social agreements can have causal powers. The reason
why they cannot answer these questions is that they do not take into
account the prevalence of downward causation in the world, which in
fact occurs in physics, biology, the mind, and society” (Ellis 2017b,
2019).
David Chalmers distinguishes strong downward causation from weak
downward causation. “With strong downward causation, the causal
impact of a high-level phenomenon on low-level processes is not
deducible even in principle from initial conditions and low-level laws.
With weak downward causation, the causal impact of the high-level
phenomenon is deducible in principle, but is nevertheless unexpected.
As with strong and weak emergence, both strong and weak downward
causation are interesting in their own right. But strong downward
causation would have more radical consequences for our understanding
of nature.” However, Chalmers concludes, “I do not know whether there
is any strong downward causation, but it seems to me that if there is any
strong downward causation, quantum mechanics is the most likely locus
for it … The question remains wide open, however, as to whether or not
strong downward causation exists” (Chalmers, 2008).
10.2. Murphy’s non-reductive physicalism
Christian philosopher Nancey Murphy, reflecting increasing Chris-
tian scholarship calling for acceptance of physicalism, argues that the
theological workability of physicalism depends on the success of an
argument against reductionism. She takes Non-Reductive Physicalism, a
common term in philosophy of mind, to “signal opposition to
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
87
anthropological dualisms of body and either mind or soul, as well as to
physicalist accounts that reduce humans to nothing but complex ani-
mals.” She sets herself the task of showing that “non-reductive physi-
calism is philosophically defensible, compatible with mainstream
cognitive neuroscience, and is also acceptable biblically and the-
ologically”—a task made more difficult because she must be able to
explain “how Christians for centuries could have been wrong in
believing dualism to be biblical teaching” (Murphy, 2017, 2018).
To Murphy, part of the answer lies in translation. She focuses on the
Septuagint, a Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures that dates from
around 250 BC. This text translated Hebrew terminology into Greek, and
“it then contained terms that, in the minds of Christians influenced by
Greek philosophy, referred to constituent parts of humans. Later Chris-
tians have obligingly read and translated them in this way.” A key
instance, she says, is “the Hebrew word nephesh, which was translated as
psyche in the Septuagint and later into English as ‘soul’ … In most cases
the Hebrew or Greek term is taken simply to be a way of referring to the
whole living person” (Murphy, 2018).
Murphy is impressed by how many capacities or faculties of the soul,
as attributed by Thomas Aquinas, are now well explained by cognitive
science and neurobiology. She is moved by “localization studies—that is,
research indicating not only that the brain is involved in specific mental
operations, but that very specific regions are.”
That gives her the physicalism—the easy part, I’d say. What about
the non-reductive—the hard part?
An obvious answer to the problem of neurobiological reductionism,
Murphy says, would be the presence and power of downward causation
or whole-part causation. That is, if causal reductionism is the thesis that
all causation is from part to whole, then the complementary alternative
causation would be from whole to part. If we describe a more complex
system, such as an organism, as a higher-level system than the simple
sum of its biological parts, then causal reductionism is bottom-up
causation, and the alternative, causal anti-reductionism, or causal non-
reductionism, is top-down or downward causation (Murphy, 2017).
To support Non-reductive Physicalism by undermining reductionist
determinism, Murphy recruits contemporary concepts in systems the-
ory, such as chaos theory, non-linear dynamics, complex adaptive sys-
tems, systems probabilities, and systems biology. Thus, Murphy posits,
an understanding of downward causation in complex systems allows for
the defeat of neurobiological reductionism.
Finally, Murphy muses that “non-reductive physicalism, while it is
the term most often used in philosophy, is perhaps not the best for
purposes of Christian anthropology, because, at least by connotation, it
places disproportionate stress on the aspect of our physicality.” She
quotes theologian Veli-Matti K¨arkk¨ainen in proposing a replacement:
“multi-aspect monism” (Murphy, 2018).
10.3. Van Inwagen’s Christian materialism and the resurrection of the
dead
Christian philosopher/metaphysician Peter van Inwagen combines a
wholly materialist ontology of the human person (Van Inwagen, 2007a)
with a committed belief in the resurrection of the dead as the Christian
hope of eternal life. His thesis is that “dualism is a Greek import into
Christianity and that the Christian resurrection of the dead does not
presuppose dualism” (Van Inwagen, 1995, 2007b).
He states, “Most Christians seem to have a picture of the afterlife that
can without too much unfairness be described as ‘Platonic.’ When one
dies, one’s body decays, and what one is, what one has been all along, an
immaterial soul or mind or self, continues to exist”—a picture and a
doctrine that Van Inwagen finds “unsatisfactory, both as a Christian and
as a philosopher” (Van Inwagen, 1995).
He reflects, “when I enter most deeply into that which I call myself, I
seem to discover that I am a living animal. And, therefore, dualism
seems to me to be an unnecessarily complicated theory about my nature
unless there is some fact or phenomenon or aspect of the world that
dualism deals with better than materialism does” (which he does not
find). As for the argument from phenomenal consciousness, he admits,
“It is a mystery how a material thing could have sensuous properties
[phenomenal consciousness],” but then retorts, “simply and solely
because it is a mystery how anything could.”
Van Inwagen rejects dualism biblically as well as philosophically.
After examining biblical texts in the Old Testament, Van Inwagen finds
“little to support dualism in the Old Testament, and much that the
materialist will find congenial.” His analysis of New Testament texts
requires more elaborate (some may say more convoluted) exegesis:
“twisting and turning, impaled on intransigent texts,” in Van Inwagen’s
own self-deprecating words. For example, Jesus’s parable of the “Rich
Man” and his words to the “Good Thief” on the cross (“Today you shall
be with me in Paradise.”). Moreover, Paul’s repeated representation of
death as “sleep” cannot be discounted.
An important philosophical argument for Christian dualism, Van
Inwagen says, is that the doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead seems
to presuppose dualism. “For if I am not something immaterial, if I am a
living animal, then death must be the end of me. If I am a living animal,
then I am a material object. If I am a material object, then I am the
mereological sum of certain atoms. But if I am the mereological sum of
certain atoms today, it is clear from what we know about the metabo-
lisms of living things that I was not the sum of those same atoms a year
ago” (Van Inwagen, 1995).
For the materialist who believes in the biblical resurrection of the
dead as a literal future event, as Van Inwagen does, the fact that the
atoms of which we are composed are in continuous flux is a “stumbling
block.” He asks, “How shall even omnipotence bring me back—me,
whose former atoms are now spread pretty evenly throughout the
biosphere?” This question does not confront the dualist, who will say
that there is no need to bring me back because I have never left. But what
shall the materialist say?” (Van Inwagen, 1995).
Van Inwagen challenges Divine power: “For what can even omnip-
otence do but reassemble? What else is there to do? And reassembly is not
enough, for I have been composed of different atoms at different times.”
This leads to the conundrum of myriad duplicates.
In the end, Van Inwagen concludes, “there would seem to be no way
around the following requirement: if I am a material thing, then, if a man
who lives at some time in the future is to be I, there will have to be some
sort of material and causal continuity between this matter that composes
me now and the matter that will then compose that man.” Van Inwagen
finds this requirement looking very much like Paul’s description of the
resurrection: “when I die, the power of God will somehow preserve
something of my present being, a gumnos k´okkos [bare/naked grain/
kernel35], which will continue to exist throughout the interval between
my death and my resurrection and will, at the general resurrection, be
clothed in a festal garment of new flesh” (Van Inwagen, 1995).
While van Inwagen would be the first to admit that “oddly enough,”
few Christian dualists have been persuaded by his arguments against a
Christian immortal soul, I (for one) consider his arguments probative,
disruptive, insightful (if not dispositive) (Van Inwagen, 2007b).
10.4. Nagasawa’s nontheoretical physicalism
Philosopher Yujin Nagasawa interrelates central debates in philoso-
phy of mind (phenomenal consciousness) and philosophy of religion
35 Gumnos k´okkos [bare/naked grain/kernel] comes from 1 Corinthians 15:37,
referring to how on Earth God could resurrect the dead. Here, in context: 1
Corinthians 15:35–38, King James Version—“But some man will say, ‘How are
the dead raised up? And with what body do they come?’ Thou fool, that which
thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: And that which thou sowest, thou
sowest not that body that shall be, but bare [naked] grain, it may chance of
wheat, or of some other grain: But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him,
and to every seed his own body.”
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
88
(existence of God) to construct a unique metaphysical thesis, which he
calls “nontheoretical physicalism,” by which he claims that although
this world is entirely physical, there are physical facts that cannot be
captured even by complete theories of the physical sciences (Nagasawa,
2008). This is no defense of traditional Non-Reductive Physicalism, but
it is consistent with some of its distinguishing features.
Nagasawa’s unique methodology, moving from epistemology to
ontology, draws heretofore unrecognized parallels between funda-
mental arguments in philosophy of mind and philosophy of religion,
using in the former the Knowledge Argument that Mary cannot know
what it is like to see color in her black-and-white room, and in the latter
atheistic arguments that God cannot know what it is like to be evil or
limited due to his perfections. From what Nagasawa takes as the failures
of traditional arguments against physicalism, yet in still rejecting a
physicalist approach to phenomenal consciousness, he constructs his
“nontheoretical physicalism” (Nagasawa, 2023).
What Nagasawa means by “nontheoretical” is an explanation of
physicalism that is entity-based, not theory-based, which is consistent
with his view that even with complete and final physical theories all
reality cannot be explained (Nagasawa, 2008).
10.5. Sanfey’s Abstract Realism
Medical doctor John Sanfey’s Abstract Realism (AR) claims to bridge
the mind-matter explanatory gap with two arguments suggesting a
complementarity between first and third-person perspectives, with each
perspective containing an equivalent observer function. The first argu-
ment posits that science must use abstract devices integrating past and
future moments of continuous time that reflect first-person perception.
The second argument tackles the hard problem by examining phenom-
enal simultaneity, where no time separates experiencer from experi-
enced (Sanfey, 2023).
In “something it is like to experience redness,” the experiencer knows
they are not simultaneously causing the redness; one cannot consciously
cause something without being conscious of doing so, obviously. But an
intelligent system not experiencing conscious presence cannot be certain
it is not causing what it perceives because its observing self must reside
in the same physical systems that may or may not be producing illusions.
This suggests, to Sanfey, that experiencing presence is sufficient to
create logical possibilities such as disembodied mind or idealism.
Rooted in phenomenal simultaneity, these causal mechanics of con-
sciousness are unobservable in principle, he says, making consciousness
indistinguishable from strong emergence. Proven causal power means
that consciousness can be produced by physical systems even synthetic
ones without introducing new physics. (In Sanfey’s AR, the brain gen-
erates consciousness when two information systems, two electromag-
netic fields [9.3], interact bi-directionally, causally, and with sufficient
complexity such that one is the observing reference for the other.)
(Sanfey, 2023).
Simultaneous causation cannot happen, but experiential simulta-
neity is certain, and with causal power, consciousness can be integrated
with physics within a Non-Reductive Physicalism paradigm—without
appealing to psycho-identity, panpsychism, idealism, or reductive
physicalism. Matter, defined as that which behaves according to phys-
ical laws independently of conscious mind, is always either a sensory or
conceptual model, a complementarity of first and third-person per-
spectives, each containing an equivalent observer function (Sanfey,
2023).
10.6. Northoff’s non-reductive neurophilosophy
Northoff frames his views on consciousness (1.2.12) as “non-reduc-
tive neurophilosophy,” which, he says, is “primarily a methodological
approach,” a particular strategy that takes into account “certain phe-
nomena which otherwise would remain outside our scope [conscious-
ness studies].” He deems “the link of conceptual models and ontological
theories with empirical data to be key in providing insight into brain-
mind connection and its subjectivity” (Northoff, 2022).
Paraphrasing Kant, Northoff says that “brain data without brain-
mind models are blind, brain-mind models without brain data are
empty.” Thus, Northoff has non-reductive neurophilosophy allowing for
“a systematic and bilateral connection of theoretical concepts and
empirical data, of philosophy and neuroscience.” His emphasis is on
“systematic,” by providing and defining “different steps in how to link
concepts and facts in a valid way without reducing the one to the
respective other.” Taken in such sense, Northoff considers non-reductive
neurophilosophy “a methodological strategy of analyzing the relation-
ship of concepts and facts just like there are specific methods of logical
analyses in philosophy and empirical data analysis in neuroscience.” In
other words, “non-reductive neurophilosophy is a methodological tool
at the interface of philosophy and neuroscience. As such it can be
applied to problems in both philosophy and neuroscience” (Northoff,
2022).
11. Quantum theories
Quantum theories of consciousness take seriously the idea that
quantum mechanics plays a necessary, if not sufficient role, in the spe-
cific generation of phenomenal consciousness in certain physical entities
like brains—beyond the general application of quantum mechanics in all
physical entities. The kinds of quantum theories or models on offer differ
radically.
Philosopher of science Paavo Pylkk¨anen explores whether the
dynamical and holistic features of conscious experience might reflect
“the dynamic and holistic quantum physical processes associated with
the brain that may underlie (and make possible) the more mechanistic
neurophysiological processes that contemporary cognitive neuroscience
is measuring.” If so, he says, “these macroscopic processes would be a
kind of shadow, or amplification of the results of quantum processes at a
deeper (pre-spatial or ‘implicate’) level where our minds and conscious
experience essentially live and unfold.” At the very least, Pylkk¨anen
says, “a quantum perspective will help a ‘classical’ consciousness theo-
rist to become better aware of some of the hidden assumptions in his or
her approach.” What quantum theory is all about, he stresses, is
“learning, on the basis of scientific experiments, to question the
‘obvious’ truths about the nature of the physical world and to come up
with more coherent alternatives” (Pylkk¨anen, 2018).
There is certainly growing interest in the putative quantum-con-
sciousness nexus. For example, Quantum and Consciousness Revisited,
with papers the product of two conferences, present various philo-
sophical approaches to quantum paradoxes including further consider-
ations of the Copenhagen Interpretation and alternatives with
implications for consciousness studies, mathematics and biology. Topics
include observation and measurement; collapse of the wave function;
and time and gravity. All the papers, the editors write, “reopen the
questions of consciousness and meaning which occupied the minds of
the early thinkers of quantum physics” (Kafatos et al., 2024).
In his technical review article, “Quantum Approaches to Con-
sciousness,” theoretical physicist Harald Atmanspacher describes three
basic approaches to the question of whether quantum theory can help
understand consciousness: (1) consciousness as manifestation of quan-
tum processes in the brain, (2) quantum concepts elucidating con-
sciousness without referring to brain activity, and (3) matter and
consciousness as dual aspects of one underlying reality (Atmanspacher,
2020a).
For example, one approach considers how quantum field theory can
describe why and how classical behavior emerges at the level of brain
activity. The relevant brain states themselves are properly considered as
classical states. The idea, Atmanspacher says, is “similar to a classical
thermodynamical description arising from quantum statistical me-
chanics,” and works “to identify different regimes of stable behavior
(phases, attractors) and transitions between them. This way, quantum
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
89
field theory provides formal elements from which a standard classical
description of brain activity can be inferred” (Atmanspacher, 2020a).
Atmanspacher reports applications of quantum concepts to mental
processes, focusing on complementarity, entanglement, dispersive
states, and non-Boolean logic. These involve quantum-inspired concepts
to address purely mental (psychological or cognitive) phenomena,
without claiming that actual quantum mechanics is necessary to make it
work. This includes research groups studying quantum ideas in cogni-
tion (Patra, 2019). While the term “quantum cognition” has gained
acceptance, Atmanspacher says that a more appropriate characteriza-
tion would be “non-commutative structures in cognition,” and he
questions whether it is “necessarily true that quantum features in psy-
chology imply quantum physics in the brain?” (Atmanspacher, 2020a).
After reviewing major quantum theories of consciousness (several
are discussed below), Atmanspacher suggests that progress is more
likely made by investigating “mental quantum features without focusing
on associated brain activity” (at least to begin with). Ultimately, he says,
“mind-matter entanglement is conceived as the hypothetical origin of
mind-matter correlations. This exhibits the highly speculative picture of
a fundamentally holistic, psychophysically neutral level of reality from
which correlated mental and material domains emerge” (Atmans-
pacher’s Dual-Aspect Monism, 14.7.).
To position quantum theories of consciousness, consider each as
representing one of two forms: (i) quantum processes, similar to those in
diverse areas of biology (e.g., photosynthesis), that uniquely empower
or enable the special activities of cells, primarily neurons, to generate
consciousness; and (ii) the more radical claim that these two great
mysteries, consciousness and quantum theory, are intimately connected
such that the solution to both mysteries can be solved only together.
Physicist Carlo Rovelli disagrees. Consciousness and quantum me-
chanics, he says, have no special, intimate relationship. With respect to
quantum mechanics, Rovelli says, “Consciousness never played a role …
except for some fringe speculations that I do not believe have any solid
ground. The notion of ‘observer’ should not be misunderstood. In
quantum physics parlance an ‘observer’ can be a detector, a screen, or
even a stone. Anything that is affected by a process. It does not need to
be conscious, or human, or living, or anything of the sort” (Rovelli,
2022).
Philosopher of physics David Wallace sees “potentially intriguing
connections between consciousness and quantum mechanics, tied partly
to the idea that traditional formulations of quantum mechanics seem to
give a role to measurement or observation—and, well, what is that?” He
says, “the natural hypothesis is that measurement or observation is
conscious perception,” which somehow implies “a role of a conscious
observer.” Although this would be “extremely suggestive for connecting
the two”—consciousness and quantum mechanics—"but you can con-
nect them in a lot of ways.” Some, Wallace says, might try to explain
consciousness reductionistically in terms of quantum mechanical pro-
cesses. But, “In my view, that works no better than explaining con-
sciousness in terms of classical processes.” However, “Another way is not
try to reduce consciousness, but find roles for consciousness in quantum
mechanics. That’s one of the big questions about consciousness. What
does it do? What is it here for? How can it affect the physical world? So,
I’m at least taking seriously the idea that maybe consciousness plays a
potential role in quantum mechanics. It’s a version of the traditional
idea that consciousness collapses the wave function. It’s not an espe-
cially popular idea among physicists these days, partly because it takes
consciousness as fundamental—but if, like me, you think there are in-
dependent reasons to do that, then I think it’s an avenue worth looking
at” (Wallace, 2016b).
Chalmers and McQueen readdress the question of whether con-
sciousness collapses the quantum wave function. Noting that this idea
was taken seriously by John von Neumann and Eugene Wigner but is
now widely dismissed, they develop the idea by combining a mathe-
matical theory of consciousness (Integrated Information Theory, 12)
with an account of quantum collapse dynamics (continuous spontaneous
localization). In principle, versions of the theory can be tested by ex-
periments with quantum computers. The upshot is not that conscious-
ness-collapse interpretations are clearly correct, but that there is a
research program here worth exploring (Chalmers and McQueen, 2022).
Physicist Tim Palmer argues that our ability for counterfactual
thinking—the existence of alternative worlds where things happen dif-
ferently—which is both an exercise in imagination and a key prediction
of quantum mechanics—suggests that “our brains are able to ponder
how things could have been because in essence they are quantum
computers, accessing information from alternative worlds” (he recruits
the Many Worlds Interpretation of quantum mechanics). Consciousness
(along with understanding and free will), he states, “involves appealing
to counterfactual worlds” and thus “quantum computing is the key to
consciousness” (Palmer, 2023).
At the very least, for quantum processing to play a content or
informational role in the brain it would require some mechanism that
stores and transports quantum information in qubits for sufficiently
long, macroscopic times. Moreover, the mechanism would need to
entangle vast numbers of qubits, and then that entanglement would
need to be translated into higher-level chemistry in order to influence
how neurons trigger action potentials (Ouellette, 2016). Experiments
with anesthetics and brain organoids hint that quantum effects in the
brain may be in some way involved in consciousness (Musser, 2024).
Although most physicists and neuroscientists have not taken quan-
tum theories of consciousness seriously, such theories are proliferating,
becoming more sophisticated and mainstream, and are increasingly
backed up by claims of experimental evidence. Personally, I started out
an incorrigible, utter skeptic about quantum consciousness; I’m still a
skeptic, though no longer so incorrigible, no longer so utter.
11.1. Penrose-Hameroff’s orchestrated objective reduction
Penrose-Hameroff’s quantum consciousness, which they call
Orchestrated Objective Reduction (OrchOR), is the claim that con-
sciousness arises in the fundamental gap between the quantum and
classical worlds. Formulated by mathematician and Nobel laureate
Roger Penrose (Penrose, 2014; 1996; Penrose, 2014, 2023), and devel-
oped by anesthesiologist Stuart Hameroff (Hameroff, 2014a, 2014b),
consciousness is non-computational, yet still explained by the physics of
neurons, but a physics distinct from and broader than that which we
currently understand.
Penrose claims that only a non-computational physical process could
explain consciousness. He is not saying that consciousness is beyond
physics, rather that it is beyond today’s physics. “Conscious thinking
can’t be described entirely by the physics that we know,” Penrose said,
explaining that he “needed something that had a hope of being non-
computational.”36 He focuses on “the main gap in physics”: the
contradiction between the continuous, probabilistic evolution given by
the Schr¨odinger equation in quantum mechanics and the discrete,
deterministic events when you make measurements in classical phys-
ics—“how rules like Schr¨odinger’s cat being dead and alive at the same
time in quantum mechanics do not apply at the classical level” (Penrose,
2014, 2023),
Penrose argues that the missing physics that describes how the
quantum world becomes the classical world “is the only place where you
could have non-computational activity.” But he admits that it’s “a tall
order” to sustain quantum information in the hot, wet brain, because
“whenever quantum systems become entangled with the environment,
‘environmental decoherence’ occurs and information is lost.”
“Quantum mechanics acting incoherently is not useful [to account
for consciousness],” Penrose explains; “it has to act coherently. That’s
36 Quotes from Penrose and Hameroff come from their Closer To Truth videos:
Roger Penrose—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/roger-penrose/; Stuart
Hameroff—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/stuart-hameroff/.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
90
why we call [our mechanism] ‘Orch OR’, or ‘orchestrated objective
reduction’—the ‘OR’ stands for objective reduction, which is where the
quantum state collapses to one alternative or another, and ‘Orch’ stands
for orchestrated. The whole system must be orchestrated, or organized,
in some global way, so that the different reductions of the states actually
do make a big difference to what happens to the network of neurons”
(Penrose, 2014, 2023),
So how can the hot, wet brain operate a quantum information sys-
tem? Hameroff proposed a biological mechanism utilizing microtubules
in neurons. As an anesthesiologist who had shepherded thousands of
conscious-unconscious-conscious transitions, Hameroff, together with
Penrose, developed their quantum theory of consciousness.
“Objective reduction in the quantum world is occurring every-
where,” Hameroff recognizes, “so proto-conscious, undifferentiated
moments are ubiquitous in the universe. Now in our view when
orchestrated objective reduction occurs in neuronal microtubules, the
process gives rise to rich conscious experience” (Hameroff, 2014b).
In Hameroff’s telling, microtubules are cylindrical polymers of the
protein tubulin capable of information processing, with fundamental
units being states of a billion tubulins per neuron. Microtubules in all
cells enact purposeful spatiotemporal activities, and in the brain, mi-
crotubules establish neuronal shape, create and regulate synapses, and
are proposed to underlie memory, cognition and consciousness. Tubulin
is the brain’s most prevalent protein, so the brain is largely made of
microtubules, each with unique, high frequency vibrational and quan-
tum properties from non-polar aromatic ring pathways. The claim is
made that experimental evidence shows that anti-depressants, psyche-
delics and general anesthetics, which selectively alter or block con-
sciousness, all act via microtubules (Brophy and Hameroff, 2023).
Some evidence suggests that entangled states can be maintained in
noisy open quantum systems at high temperature and far from thermal
equilibrium—for example, counterbalancing decoherence by a “reco-
herence” mechanism—such that, “under particular circumstances,
entanglement may persist even in hot and noisy environments such as
the brain” (Atmanspacher, 2020a). Moreover, Anirban Bandyopadhyay
describes experiments with the tubulin protein in microtubules where
conductivity resistance becomes so low it’s almost a macroscopic
quantum-like system (Bandyopadhyay, 2014).
Penrose’s ontology requires basic conscious acts to be linked to
gravitation-mediated reductions of quantum states, with “real quantum
jumps” related to conscious thoughts and, by extension, to neural cor-
relates of consciousness. A complete theory seems to require a robust
theory of quantum gravity, long the holy grail of physics.
As noted, the Orch OR theory proposes that consciousness arises
from orchestrated (Orch) quantum state objective reductions (OR) in
microtubules within brain neurons, which connect, adherents say, to the
fine-scale structure of spacetime geometry. Adherents posit that Orch
OR accounts for cognitive binding, real-time conscious causal action
(through non-computable Penrose OR and retroactivity), memory
encoding, and, ambitiously, the hard problem of phenomenal experi-
ence. Moreover, consciousness as a non-local quantum process in
spacetime geometry provides potentially plausible mechanism for near-
death and out-of-body experiences, pre-cognition, afterlife and rein-
carnation (Brophy and Hameroff, 2023). Quite the claim, that.
Hameroff makes the striking statement that “consciousness came
before life.” Based on observations of extraterrestrial organic material,
in context of the Penrose-Hameroff quantum theory of consciousness,
Hameroff challenges the conventional wisdom that consciousness
evolved after life, posing that “consciousness may have been what made
evolution and life possible in the first place” (Hameroff et al., 2024).
For years, Penrose-Hameroff stood largely alone, defending their
quantum consciousness model against waves of scientific critics (Baars
and Edelman, 2012), some of whom largely dismissed the notion as
fanciful and fringy. Then, as quantum biology began emerging as a real
science with broad applications—with quantum mechanisms shown to
play essential roles in photosynthesis, vision, olfaction, mitochondria,
DNA mutations, magnetoreception, etc.—a larger community began
taking quantum consciousness more seriously.
Today, while Penrose-Hameroff Orch OR remains the most well-
known quantum theory of consciousness, with increasing interest, there
are other, diverse theories of how quantum processes are essential in
consciousness. Their numbers are growing.
11.2. Stapp’s collapsing the wave function via asking “questions”
Mathematical physicist Henry Stapp argues for the quantum nature
of consciousness by relying on a traditional interpretation of quantum
mechanics, where quantum wave functions collapse only when they
interact with consciousness in an act of measurement. He envisions a
“mind-like” wave-function collapse that exploits quantum effects in the
synapses between neurons, generating consciousness, which he believes
is fundamental to the universe (Stapp, 2011, 2023, 2007.)
Stapp founds his theory on the transition from the classical-physics
conception of reality to von Neumann’s application of the principles of
quantum physics to our conscious brains (Stapp, 2006; Von Neumann,
1955/1932). Von Neumann extended quantum theory to incorporate
the devices and the brain/body of the observers into physical theory,
leaving out only the stream of conscious experiences of the agents. Ac-
cording to von Neumann’s formulation, “the part of the physically
described system being directly acted upon by a psychologically
described ‘observer’ is the brain of that observer” (Stapp, 2011).
The quantum jump of the state of an observer’s brain to the ‘Yes’
basis state (vector) then becomes the representation, in the state of that
brain, of the conscious acquisition of the knowledge associated with that
answer ‘Yes,’ which constitutes the neural correlate of that person’s
conscious experience. This fixes the essential quantum link between
consciousness and neuroscience (Stapp, 2006).
To Stapp, this is the key point. “Quantum physics is built around
‘events’ that have both physical and phenomenal aspects. The events are
physical because they are represented in the physical/mathematical
description by a ‘quantum jump’ to one or another of the basis state
vectors defined by the agent/observer’s choice of what question to ask.
If the resulting event is such that the ‘Yes’ feedback experience occurs
then this event ‘collapses’ the prior physical state to a new physical state
compatible with that phenomenal experience” (Stapp, 2006).
Thus, in Stapp’s telling, mind and matter thereby become dynami-
cally linked in a way that is causally tied to an agent’s free choice of how
to act. “A causal dynamical connection is established between (1) a
person’s conscious choices of how to act, (2) that person’s consciously
experienced increments in knowledge, and (3) the physical actualiza-
tions of the neural correlates of the experienced increments in knowl-
edge” (Stapp, 2006).
More colloquially, Stapp argues that given the perspective of clas-
sical physics, where all is mechanical, where the physical universe is a
closed system, “there’s nothing for consciousness to do … and so it must
be some sort of an illusion.” Why would there have been consciousness
at all, he asks? Under classical physics, “consciousness is just sitting
there inert, a passive observer of the scene in which it has no function; it
does nothing. So, it’s a mystery why consciousness should ever come
into existence” (Stapp, 2007).
In stark contrast, Stapp says, the way quantum mechanics works, in
order to get consequences, predictions, there must be a question posed.
It’s like “20 questions,” yes-or-no questions. A question is posed in the
quantum mechanical scheme; then there is an evolution according to the
Schrodinger equation, and then nature gives an answer (which is sta-
tistically determined).
The axial idea, Stapp says, is that there is nothing in quantum me-
chanics that determines what decides the questions. This means that
there’s a gap, a critical causal gap in quantum mechanics. And the way
it’s filled in practice is that an observer, on the basis of reasons or mo-
tivations or with rules, sets up a certain experiment in a certain way. For
example, putting a Geiger counter or some other detector in the path of
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
91
particles.
This yields Stapp’s concept of quantum consciousness. Nobody de-
nies that thoughts exist, he says, but how do they do something? And
that’s the place where quantum consciousness has causal impact.
The crux of quantum mechanics is what questions are going to be
asked. There is nothing in classical physics that asks such questions. But
in quantum mechanics questions are answered by the psychological
process of the experimenter, who is interested in learning something.
And because there is nothing in the way quantum mechanics works that
explains the choice of the question, there is an opening for the injection
of mental events into the flow of physical events. The choice of the
question is not determined by the laws as we know them (Stapp, 2007).
This means we need another process, which is consciousness. And
this gives consciousness an actual role to play and allows it to do things
causally. And if consciousness can act causally and do things, Stapp says,
then classic materialism is out.
Niels Bohr had a famous quote: “one must never forget that in the
drama of existence we are ourselves both actors and spectators.” In the
classical worldview, Stapp says, “we were just spectators; always we
would just watch what’s happening but couldn’t do anything. In the
quantum mechanical worldview, we are actors. We are needed to make
the theory work.”
Moreover, Stapp says, “this mental process cannot just be the product
of the brain, because the brain, like all physical things, evolves via
quantum mechanical rules. While quantum mechanics describes the
evolution of potentialities for events to happen, that’s all they describe,
only potentialities—they do not describe what chooses the events that
are going to happen, the actual events. Something must ask the ques-
tions, something outside of quantum mechanics—quantum mechanics
forces that process.” The only candidate, Stapp says, must be the inde-
pendent existence of consciousness (Stapp, 2007).
Stapp’s conclusions are as bold as they are controversial. First, the
ontological foundations of consciousness and quantum mechanics are
inextricably linked. Second, classical materialism is defeated (Stapp,
2007).
Philosopher of physics David Wallace is sympathetic with the idea
that consciousness with respect to quantum physics has to be taken
somehow as fundamental and irreducible, but there are two different
ways that could go. “There’s the dualist way, where you have physics
and you have consciousness as two separate things, and there’s the
panpsychist idea, where consciousness underlies all of physics and is
present at the most fundamental level of every physical process. Those
are two different ideas” (Wallace, 2016a, 2016b).
When Wallace thinks about consciousness collapsing the wave
function, as in quantum mechanics, he says, “That’s the dualist half of
my head. You’ve got physics, you’ve got a wave function, and you’ve got
consciousness, which is observing the wave function. And somehow
consciousness is something distinct from the physical wave function and
every now and then affecting it in this interesting phenomenon of
collapse. In a way, it’s an updated version of Rene Descartes’s dualism:
there’s mind and then there’s body; they’re separate and they interact.”
Wallace says one could try to combine dualism and panpsychism
with respect to the relationship between consciousness and quantum
mechanics, “but I don’t think they’d combine all that well,” he said. “If
consciousness is everywhere and consciousness collapses the wave
function, then the wave function would be constantly collapsing and we
know that doesn’t happen because you get interference effects in double
slit experiments. So, I think these two ideas, panpsychism and con-
sciousness collapsing the wave function, should be pursued on separate
tracks (Wallace, 2016a; 2016b; 2016c.)
11.3. Bohm’s implicate-explicate order
Quantum physicist David Bohm, colleague of Einstein, famously
introduced the idea of “implicate order” and “explicate order” as onto-
logical implications of quantum theory to explain two radically opposed
perspectives of the same phenomenon—something seems to be needed
to account for the bizarrely divergent ways of conceiving reality,
quantum and classical, both of which seemed undeniably correct.
Bohm is a big thinker, leveraging the counterintuitive concepts of
quantum mechanics to try to see reality as it really is. He envisions
matter and mind as intertwined. He worked with Karl Pribram to
develop “Holonomic Brain Theory” (9.4.5). He explored the essence of
thought with Indian philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti. Of particular
import is what he calls “undivided wholeness,” meaning that the subject
actively participates with the object, rather than being a detached
observer. Bohm developed his “wholeness” as innately dynamic, alive,
and open-ended (Gomez-Marin, 2023a).
According to Bohm, everything is in a state of process or becoming
(folding and unfolding)—Bohm calls it the "universal flux". All is dy-
namic interconnected process. In the same manner, Bohm says,
“knowledge, too, is a process, an abstraction from the one total flux,
which latter is therefore the ground both of reality and of knowledge of
this reality” (Section: Bohm, 1980; Bohm, Wise Insights Forum, website).
Now, regarding “implicate order,” Bohm means “order which is
enfolded (the root meaning of ‘implicate’) and later unfolded or made
explicate.” Relating the enfolding-unfolding universe to consciousness,
Bohm contrasts mechanistic order with implicate order. In mechanistic
order, which is inherent to classical physics, “the principal feature of this
order is that the world is regarded as constituted of entities which are
outside of each other, in the sense that they exist independently in
different regions of space (and time) and interact through forces that do
not bring about any changes in their essential natures. The machine
gives a typical illustration of such a system of order …. By contrast, in a
living organism, for example, each part grows in the context of the
whole, so that it does not exist independently, nor can it be said that it
merely ‘interacts’ with the others, without itself being essentially
affected in this relationship” (Bohm, 1980; Bohm, n.d.).
Bohm contends, “the implicate order applies both to matter (living
and non-living) and to consciousness, and that it can therefore make
possible an understanding of the general relationship between these
two”—yet he recognizes “the very great difference in their basic quali-
ties.” Still, he believes that because both consciousness and matter are
extensions of the implicate order, a connection is possible.
To Bohm, the explicate order, which is “the order that we commonly
contact in common experience,” has room “for something like memory”,
with the fact that “memories are first enfolded and then unfolded during
recall” being consistent with Bohm’s concepts of implicate and explicate
order. “Everything emerges from and returns to the Whole” (Bohm, n.
d.).
Confirming his non-materialist status, Bohm proposes, “the more
comprehensive, deeper, and more inward actuality is neither mind nor
body but rather a yet higher-dimensional actuality, which is their
common ground and which is of a nature beyond both.” What we
experience consciously, Bohm offers, is a projection of a higher-
dimensional reality onto our lower-dimensional elements. “In the
higher-dimensional ground the implicate order prevails,” he says. “Thus,
within this ground, what is is movement which is represented in thought
as the co-presence of many phases of the implicate order …. We do not
say that mind and body causally affect each other, but rather that the
movements of both are the outcome of related projections of a common
higher-dimensional ground” (Bohm, 1980; Bohm, n.d.).
11.4. Pylkk¨anen’s quantum potential energy and active information
Philosopher Paavo Pylkk¨anen proposes a view in which “the mech-
anistic framework of classical physics and neuroscience is com-
plemented by a more holistic underlying framework in which conscious
experience finds its place more naturally” (Pylkk¨anen, 2007). Recog-
nizing that it is “very likely that some radically new ideas are required if
we are to make any progress” on the hard problem, he turns to quantum
theory “to understand the place of mind and conscious experience in
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
92
nature.” In particular, Pylkk¨anen and physicist Basil Hiley focus on the
ontological interpretation of quantum theory proposed by David Bohm
and Hiley (1993) and make “the radical proposal that quantum reality
includes a new type of potential energy which contains active infor-
mation. This proposal, if correct, constitutes a major change in our
notion of matter” (Hiley and Pylkk¨anen, 2022).
Pylkk¨anen and Hiley’s intuition is that the reason “it is not possible
to understand how and why physical processes can give rise to con-
sciousness is partly the result of our assuming that physical processes
(including neurophysiological processes) are always mechanical.”
However, they say, if “we are willing to change our view of physical
reality by allowing non-mechanical, organic and holistic concepts such
as active information to play a fundamental role,” this might make it
possible to understand the relationship between physical and mental
processes in a new way (Hiley and Pylkk¨anen, 2022). For example, the
human brain could operate in some ways like a “quantum measuring
apparatus” (Pylkk¨anen, 2022).
Philosophically, according to Pylkk¨anen, that the physical domain is
causally closed has left “no room for mental states qua mental to have a
causal influence upon the physical domain, leading to epiphenome-
nalism and the problem of mental causation.” One road to a possible
solution is called “causal antifundamentalism:” causal notions cannot
play a role in physics, because the fundamental laws of physics are
radically different from causal laws.” While “causal anti-fundamen-
talism seems to challenge the received view in physicalist philosophy of
mind and thus raises the possibility of there being genuine mental
causation after all,” Pylkk¨anen rejects it in favor of the ontological
interpretation of quantum theory imparting active information
(Pylkk¨anen, 2019).
11.5. Wolfram’s consciousness in the ruliad
Physicist and computer scientist Stephen Wolfram seeks “to
formalize issues about consciousness, and to turn questions about con-
sciousness into what amounts to concrete questions about mathematics,
computation, logic or whatever that can be formally and rigorously
explored” (Wolfram, 2021b). He begins by embedding consciousness in
what he calls the “ruliad” (neologism from “rules”), which he defines as
“the entangled limit of everything that is computationally possible: the
result of following all possible computational rules in all possible ways.”
The ruliad, he says, is “a kind of ultimate limit of all abstraction and
generalization,” encapsulating “not only all formal possibilities but also
everything about our physical universe” (Wolfram, 2021a). The ruliad is
crucial for formalizing the “rules” of consciousness, he argues, because
“everything we experience can be thought of as sampling that part of the
ruliad that corresponds to our particular way of perceiving and inter-
preting the universe” (Wolfram, 2021b).
Consciousness, Wolfram says, is not about the general computation
that brains can do. “It’s about the particular feature of our brains that
causes us to have a coherent thread of experience.” And this invokes the
ruliad, which “has deep consequences that far transcend the details of
brains or biology.” It defines (what we consider to be) the laws of physics
(Wolfram, 2021b).
While
consciousness
involves
computational
sophistication,
Wolfram says, “its essence is not so much about what can happen as
about having ways to integrate what’s happening to make it somehow
coherent and to allow what we might see as ‘definite thoughts’ to be
formed about it.” Surprisingly, “rather than consciousness being some-
how beyond ‘generalized intelligence’ or general computational so-
phistication,” he instead sees consciousness “as a kind of ‘step down’—as
something associated with simplified descriptions of the universe based
on using only bounded amounts of computation.” In addition, “for our
particular version of consciousness, the idea of sequentialization seems
to be central” (Wolfram, 2021b).
Wolfram probes consciousness by asking, “Why can’t one human
consciousness ‘get inside’ another?” It’s not just a matter of separation in
physical space, he says, “It’s also that the different consciousnesses—in
particular by virtue of their different histories—are inevitably at
different locations in rulial space. In principle they could be brought
together; but this would require not just motion in physical space, but
also motion in rulial space” (Wolfram, 2021a).
Quantum mechanics is involved in Wolfram’s consciousness, but with
more than its usual putative mechanisms. Considering the foundations of
quantum mechanics in context of the ruliad—quantum mechanics
emerges “as a result of trying to form a coherent perception of the uni-
verse”—Wolfram offers a sharp epigram to describe consciousness: “how
branching brains perceive a branching universe” (Wolfram, 2021b).
To Wolfram, to grasp the core notion of consciousness goes beyond
explicating consciousness per se because it “is crucial to our whole way of
seeing and describing the universe—and at a very fundamental level it’s
what makes the universe seem to us to have the kinds of laws and behavior
it does.” The richness of what we see, he says, reflects computational
irreducibility, “but if we are to understand it we must find computational
reducibility in it.” This is how consciousness “might fundamentally relate
to the computational reducibility we need for science, and might ulti-
mately drive our actual scientific laws” (Wolfram, 2021a).
11.6. Beck-Eccles’s quantum processes in the synapse
Sir John Eccles, Nobel laureate for his seminal work on the synapse,
the small space between neurons across which neurochemicals flow to
excite or inhibit contiguous neurons, was a pioneer in early efforts to
construct a “quantum neurobiological” theory of consciousness. In their
formulation, Beck and Eccles applied concrete quantum mechanical
features to describe how, in the cerebral cortex, incoming nerve im-
pulses cause the emission of transmitter molecules in presynaptic neu-
rons (i.e., exocytosis) via information transfer and “quantal selection”
with a direct relationship with consciousness (i.e., influenced by mental
actions) (Beck and Eccles, 1992).
Beck and Eccles propose that “the quantum state reduction, or se-
lection of amplitudes, offers a doorway for a new logic, the quantum
logic, with its unpredictability for a single event.” Because conscious
action (e.g., intention) is a dynamical process which forms temporal
patterns in relevant areas of the brain (cerebral cortex), they propose
how regulating the myriad synaptic switches between innumerable
neurons in those relevant areas can be regulated effectively by a quan-
tum trigger (based on an electron transfer process in the synaptic
membrane). Thus, they conclude, “conscious action is essentially related
to quantum state reduction” (Beck and Eccles, 1998).
Stapp supports the hypothesis that quantum effects are important in
brain dynamics in connection with cerebral exocytosis. Exocytosis is
instigated by a neuronal action potential pulse that triggers an influx of
calcium ions through ion channels into a nerve terminal, such that, due
to the very small diameter of the ion channel, the quantum wave packet
that describes the location of the ion spreads out to a size much larger
than the trigger site. This means that “one must retain both the possi-
bility that the ion activates the trigger, and exocytosis occurs, and also
the possibility that the ion misses the trigger site, and exocytosis does
not occur” (Stapp, 2006).
As Beck and Eccles hypothesize, “the mental intention (the volition)
becomes neurally effective by momentarily increasing the probability of
exocytosis in selected cortical areas” (Beck and Eccles, 1992). If so, this
fundamental indeterminism of the nature of each specific quantum state
collapse is said to open opportunity for mental powers to affect brain
states, with supposed implications for conscious intervention and even
for free will.
11.7. Kauffman’s mind mediating possibles to actuals
Theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman posits the following: (i)
Quantum measurement converts Res potentia—ontologically real Pos-
sibles—into Res extensa - ontologically real Actuals. (ii) Brain/mind/
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
93
consciousness cannot be purely classical physics because no classical
system can be an analog computer whose dynamic behavior can be
isomorphic to “possible uses”, and therefore, brain/mind/consciousness
must be partly quantum. (iii) Res potentia and Res extensa suggest a role
for mind/consciousness in collapsing the wave function converting
Possibles to Actuals, because no physical cause can convert a Possible
into an Actual. (iv) Our brain/mind/consciousness entangles with the
world in a vast superposition and we collapse the wave function to a
single state which we experience as qualia, allowing “seeing” or
“perceiving” of X to accomplish Y (Kauffman, 2019, 2023; Kauffman and
Roli, 2022)37
As Kauffman and parapsychologist Dean Radin put it, “We propose a
non-substance dualism theory, following a suggestion by Heisenberg
(1958), whereby the world consists of both ontologically real Possibles
that do not obey Aristotle’s law of the excluded middle, and ontologi-
cally real Actuals, that do obey the law of the excluded middle.” Mea-
surement, they say, is what converts Possibles into Actuals” (Kauffman
and Radin, 2020).
The “culprit” at the root of the mind-body problem, according to
Kauffman and Radin, is the causal closure of classical physics. “We ask
mind to act causally on the brain and body, but in classical physics all of
the causes are already determined.” Because of this, they conclude, no
form of substance dualism can work while quantum mechanics as the
foundational mechanism of consciousness should be taken serious-
ly—which, they say, would lead to “the intriguing possibility that some
aspects of mind are nonlocal, and that mind plays an active role in the
physical world” (Kauffman and Radin, 2020). (9.)
11.8. Torday’s cellular and cosmic consciousness
Developmental physiologist John Torday offers an original cellular-
based explanation of consciousness that embeds quantum mechanics
(Torday, 2022a, 2022b, 2023, 2024). He describes consciousness as a
two-tiered-system, derivative from physiology, having been “con-
structed” from the environment via factors in the environment that have
been assimilated via symbiogenesis and integrated as cell physi-
ology—the cell semi-permeable membrane being the first tier, and the
compartmentation and integration of cell physiologic data as cell-cell
communication as the second tier. Basing his model on both classical
Newtonian and quantum mechanical principles, he proposes that con-
sciousness is stored within and between our cells based on control
mechanisms, referencing the “First Principles of Physiology", that is,
negative entropy, chemiosmosis and homeostasis, and consciousness is
retrieved from them via the central nervous system as the “algorithm”
for translating local and non-local cellular physiologic memories into
thought (Torday, 2022a).
He claims that quantum entanglement is integral to our physiology,
and that it links our local consciousness with the non-local consciousness
of the cosmos, distinguishing causation from coincidence based on sci-
ence. Moreover, he posits that local physiologic memories are paired
with non-local memories that dwell in cosmic consciousness and that all
cellular memories are on a continuum of local and non-local properties,
and that under certain conditions we may be more locally or non-locally
conscious. He speculates that as we evolve, we move closer to the non-
local by transcending the local. He maintains that we can take advantage
of certain experiences in order to attain a transcendent level of
consciousness: lucid dreaming, near-death experiences, out-of-body
experiences, Maslow peak experiences, runner’s high (Torday, 2022a).
Torday’s main point is that “the quantum” is native to our physiology
(Torday, 2022a, 2022b, 2023, 2024). Moreover, “since our physiology
derives from the Cosmos based on Symbiogenesis,” he hypothesizes that
“the cell behaves like a functional Mobius Strip, having no ‘inside or
outside’ cell membrane surface—it is continuous with the Cosmos, its
history being codified from Quantum Entanglement to Newtonian Me-
chanics, affording the cell consciousness and unconsciousness-subcon-
sciousness as a continuum for the first time” (Torday, 2024).
11.9. Smolin’s causal theory of views
Physicist Lee Smolin approaches the question of how qualia fit into the
physical world in the context of his “relational and realist completion of
quantum theory, called the causal theory of views” (Smolin, 2020).
Smolin has long focused on a “realist” double completion of quantum
mechanics and general relativity that would give a full description of, or
explanation for, all individual physical processes, independent of our
knowledge or interventions. Such a completion is required for unifying
gravity, spacetime, and cosmology into the rest of physics. His common
theme has been that of a relational “hidden variables” theory: a realist
description of precisely what goes on in each individual event or process,
which reduces to quantum mechanics in a certain limit and averaging
procedure.
In Smolin’s theory, the first key idea is that “the universe is con-
structed from nothing but a collection of views of events, where the view
of an event is what can be known about that event’s place in the universe
from what can be seen from that event.” In other words, “the beables of
this theory [‘beable’ is short for ‘maybe-able,’ i.e., anything that could
possibly be, in any superimposed quantum states] are views from events,
the information available at each event from its causal past, such as its
causal predecessors and the energy and momentum they transfer to the
event." Smolin calls this the “view” of an event—that is, “a causal uni-
verse that is composed of a set of partial views of itself.” Within such an
ontology of views, Smolin says it’s “natural to propose that instances or
moments of conscious experience are aspects of some views. That is, an
elementary unit of consciousness is not a single qualia, but the entire of a
partial view of the universe, as seen from one event” (Smolin, 2020.)
Smolin’s second key idea restricts the views that are associated with
consciousness to within a very small set. Most events and their views are
common and routine, he says, in that they have many near copies in the
universe within their causal pasts. He proposes that these common and
routine views have no conscious perceptions. Then, “there are a few,
very rare views which are unprecedented, which are having their first
instance, or are unique, in that they have no copies in universal history.”
Smolin proposes it is “those few views of events, which are unprece-
dented, and/or unique, and are hence novel, [i.e., they are not dupli-
cates of the view of any event in the event’s own causal past] which are
the physical correlates of conscious perceptions.”
This addresses, he says, “the problem of why consciousness always
involves awareness of a bundled grouping of qualia that define a
momentary self. This gives a restricted form of panpsychism defined by a
physically based selection principle which selects which views have
experiential aspects.”
To summarize, Smolin bases his theory on two concepts: First, the
beables of a relational theory to be the views of events. Second, the
possibility of making a physical distinction between common and
routine states, on the one hand, and novel and unique states, on the
other. “A relational theory that incorporates both ideas offers a possible
setting for bringing qualia and consciousness into physics. The physical
correlates of consciousness would be the novel or unique views of
events” (Smolin, 2020.)
37 Kauffman says this new way of thinking about the mind-body problem
differs from those of Descartes, Spinoza, Berkeley, and materialism. Res
potentia and Res extensa are not substance dualism because “potentia” are not
substances. But Res potentia and Res extensa are not Spinozian monism, a
single substance with mental and physical properties. Nor are they Idealism,
which has no Res extensa. Nor are they materialism, which has no Res potentia.
Kauffman says he bases his way of thinking, in part, on Werner Heisenberg’s
ontological interpretation of the quantum state as “potentia.”
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
94
11.10. Carr’s quantum theory, psi, mental space
Mathematician-astronomer Bernard Carr speculates that “mental
space,” an unknown aspect of reality, may be the ultimate foundation of
consciousness. “Even if you believe that consciousness collapses the
wave function,” he says, “that doesn’t really accommodate conscious-
ness within physics. It’s saying that quantum theory is weird and
therefore maybe it can explain consciousness, which is also weird—but
that is illogical because it’s just explaining one mystery in terms of
another. We need to get consciousness into physics in a more funda-
mental way” (Carr, 2016a).
Carr notes that most physicists take the view that “consciousness is
just an epiphenomenon produced by the brain, independent of physics,
and that as physicists they don’t have to confront the problem of con-
sciousness because, after all, physics has a third-person perspective,
objects in the outside world, whereas consciousness has a first-person
perspective. In other words, clearly brains exist and brains are physical
systems, but consciousness is simply beyond the domain of physics. The
real issue is how can physics ever accommodate that first-person
perspective?” (Carr, 2016b).
Carr considers the radical view that “consciousness actually is more
fundamental, that the brain’s role is to limit your experience. So, when
you see the world through your eyes and hear it through your ears, the
brain is limiting your experience—which, on the face of it, might seem a
completely bizarre thing to say, but that, at least, is an alternative view,
that consciousness is not actually generated by the brain, but merely
encounters the world through the brain” (Carr, 2016c).
“The only way I can see this,” Carr poses, is a state of affairs “where
consciousness is primary, a fundamental aspect of reality. In other words,
consciousness is not just generated as a result, as the endpoint, of physical
processes. In some sense, it’s there from the beginning” (Carr, 2016c).
As to the relationship between consciousness and mathematics, Carr
sees them “on a par because I feel that the final picture of the world must
marry matter and mind. They come together. Which is primary? I’m not
sure the question even makes sense, because I prefer a picture in which
matter and mind co-exist right from the beginning.” Carr is careful to
clarify what he means by “mind.” He says, “When I use the word ‘mind’
in this context, I’m using ‘Mind’ with an upper-case ‘M’, rather than
mind with a lower-case ‘m’, which is generated by the brain. ‘Mind’ with
a big ‘M’ is like consciousness with a big ‘C’” (Carr, 2016c).
In forming his theory, Carr sees support from psi or the paranormal.
While he recognizes that psi “encompasses a multitude of sins,” there are
some aspects, such as telepathy and clairvoyance, which he takes seri-
ously, whereas other aspects, such as precognition and psychokinesis,
less so. Still, he regards even these psi phenomena as possible because of
potential deep interactions between consciousness and physics. Thus,
psi is another reason why, he says, “We need a theory of physics that
accommodates consciousness.” (Carr stresses that he gives no credence
to many aspects of psi or the paranormal.) (Carr, 2016d).
Carr’s “favorite view,” he says, is that “the way to explain this link
between minds, and indeed between minds and the physical world, is to
say that there is in some sense a ‘bigger space’ and this bigger space in
some sense links your mind and my mind.” He labels this bigger space
“mental space.” He says, “Just as there’s a physical world that reconciles
innumerable observations of the physical world, there is this ‘mental
space’ that allows connections between different minds and between
minds and the physical world—because, remember, the physical world
is also part of this bigger space.”
Carr offers another category of explanations for psi which involves
quantum theory, where entanglement can connect spatially separated
objects and events. “Maybe we’re all entangled in some weird quantum
mechanical way. Now, that’s probably the view which is currently the most
popular among parapsychologists.” However, that’s not Carr’s own view.
“As noted, my own favorite view is that there is this bigger space, this
mental space, that in some sense links minds and perhaps matter as well.”
Carr discerns the relationship between quantum theory and this
mental space. “If you want consciousness to come into physics, quantum
theory is going to play a role. All I’m saying is I don’t think that quantum
theory alone can explain all the phenomena. You need some form of
mental space to accommodate these psi or paranormal phenomena (if
you believe in these phenomena, of course, which most of my colleagues
do not).” Carr stresses, rightly I think, that psi or paranormal phenomena
are worth taking seriously (17), because even with a minimalist view
that the probability of these phenomena being real is small, their sig-
nificance for a final theory of physics would be huge” (Carr, 2016d).
11.11. Faggin’s quantum information-based panpsychism
Physicist/inventor Federico Faggin postulates “with high confi-
dence” that “consciousness and free will are properties of quantum
systems in pure quantum states” because they depend on quantum
entanglement, a nonlocal property that cannot exist in any classical,
deterministic universe (Faggin, 2023). The kind of information involved
in consciousness needs to be quantum for multiple reasons, he says,
“including its intrinsic privacy and its power of building up thoughts by
entangling qualia states.” As a result, Faggin comes to a “quantu-
m-information-based panpsychism” (QIP) (D’Ariano and Faggin, 2022).
The essence of QIP is that “a quantum system that is in a pure quantum
state is conscious of its own state, that is, it has a qualia experience of its
state.” Faggin calls this “a highly plausible postulate” because “a qualia
experience is definite (integrated, not made of a mixture of separable
parts) and private since it can only be known by the experiencer.”
More formally, the theory says that a quantum state is an effective
mathematical representation of a conscious experience because it pos-
sesses the same crucial characteristics of what it represents: the defi-
niteness and privacy of the experience. “Within QIP, quantum
information describes the subjective inner reality of quantum systems, a
reality that is private for each system” (Faggin, 2023).
But this mathematical description of an experience (a vector in Hil-
bert space), Faggin stresses, is not the experience itself. Quantum in-
formation is non-cloneable and thus can be only partially objectified
with classical information. Moreover, “the nature of that private
knowing is not numeric but qualitative and subjective, because a
conscious system ‘knows’ its own state by feeling it through qualia.”
Faggin says his hypothesis has creative possibilities, which are the
foundation of imagination, intuition, vision, creativity, comprehension,
and inventiveness, emerging “from the quantum level of reality, since a
classical world is deterministic, that is, algorithmic and predictable, and
thus incapable of real creativity.” True creativity, Faggin says, like free
will and consciousness, “are non-algorithmic properties that can only
exist in a fundamental layer of the universe ruled by quantum physics.”
Because quantum consciousness is not reproducible, Faggin predicts that
no machine can ever have it or create it (it is not reducible to mecha-
nisms) and, he says, it could continue to exist after the death of the body
(Faggin, 2023).
11.12. Fisher’s quantum cognition
Condensed matter physicist Matthew Fisher proposes that quantum
processing with nuclear spins might be operative in the brain and key to
its functioning. He identifies “phosphorus as the unique biological
element with a nuclear spin that can serve as a qubit for such putative
quantum processing—a neural qubit—while the phosphate ion is the
only possible qubit-transporter.” He suggests the “Posner molecule”
(calcium phosphate clusters, Ca9(PO4)6) as “the unique molecule that
can protect the neural qubits on very long times and thereby serve as a
(working) quantum-memory” (Fisher, 2015).
To be functionally relevant in the brain, he says, “the dynamics and
quantum entanglement of the phosphorus nuclear spins must be capable
of modulating the excitability and signaling of neurons”—which he
takes as a working definition of “quantum cognition”. Phosphate uptake
by neurons, he says, might provide the critical link.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
95
Because quantum processing requires quantum entanglement, Fisher
argues that “the enzyme catalyzed chemical reaction which breaks a
pyrophosphate ion into two phosphate ions can quantum entangle pairs
of qubits,” and that “Posner molecules, formed by binding such phos-
phate pairs with extracellular calcium ions, will inherit the nuclear spin
entanglement.” Continuing the explanatory sequence, Fisher says
“Quantum measurements can occur when a pair of Posner molecules
chemically bind and subsequently melt, releasing a shower of intra-
cellular calcium ions that can trigger further neurotransmitter release
and enhance the probability of post-synaptic neuron firing. Multiple
entangled Posner molecules, triggering non-local quantum correlations
of neuron firing rates, would provide the key mechanism for neural
quantum processing” (Fisher, 2015).
The possible centrality of quantum processing in the brain is sup-
ported by the emerging field of quantum biology. It can be called,
“quantum neuroscience” (Ouellette, 2016). Fisher’s proposal, even if
incorrect in its specifics, is useful in identifying the kinds of processes
and sequences of explanatory steps required if quantum processing is to
be fundamental for brain function in general and for consciousness in
particular.
11.13. Globus’s quantum thermofield brain dynamics
Psychiatrist-philosopher Gordon Globus seeks to link two seemingly
independent discourses: An application of quantum field theory to brain
functioning, which he calls “quantum brain dynamics,” and the conti-
nental postphenomenological tradition, especially the work of Martin
Heidegger and Jacques Derrida. Underlying both, he says, “is a new
ontology of non-Cartesian dual modes whose rich provenance is their
between" (Globus 2003).
The key issue, in Globus’s telling, is that of primary “closure”—the
nonphenomenality of quantum physical reality—and the action that
brings “dis-closure.” Dis-closure of the phenomenal world, he argues,
“can be understood within the framework of dissipative quantum ther-
mofield brain dynamics without any reference to consciousness”
(Globus, 2011). He posits to “deconstruct” the field of consciousness
studies by combining “two persistently controversial areas: the hard
problem of qualia and the measurement problem in quantum physics ….
within the framework of dissipative quantum thermofield brain dy-
namics: disclosure.” His claim is that “the problematics of conscious-
ness/brain, qualia, and measurement in quantum physics are resolved
by substituting disclosure for perceptual consciousness and dis-
tinguishing the phenomenal brain-p from the macroscopic quantum
object brain-q” (Globus, 2013).
Metaphysically, Globus conceives the world as a “continual creation”
on the part of each quantum thermofield brain in parallel, which is
“triply tuned”: by sensory input, memory and self-tuning. Such a brain,
he says, “does not primarily process information—does not compu-
te—but through its multiple tunability achieves an internal match in
which a world is disclosed, even though there is no world out there, only
objects under quantum description at microscopic, mesoscopic and
macroscopic scales.” Globus claims his “unconventional formulation
revives a version of monadology via quantum brain theory” (Globus,
2022).
Globus decries how “philosophers have said some rather naive things
by ignoring the extraordinary advances in the neurosciences in the 20th
century. The skull is not filled with green cheese!” On the other hand, he
criticizes “the arrogance of many scientists toward philosophy and their
faith in the scientific method,” which he calls “equally naïve,” asserting
that “scientists clearly have much to learn from philosophy as an intel-
lectual discipline” (Globus, 2012).
11.14. Poznanski’s dynamic organicity theory
Neuroscientist Roman Poznanski proposes a Dynamic Organicity
Theory (DOT) of consciousness, a quantum biological theory based on a
multiscale interpretation of type-B materialism.38 DOT utilizes a mul-
tiscalar temporal-topological framework to include quantum biological
effects in the sense of what happens to macroscopic systems upon
interaction with quantum potential energy that exists when a living
negentropic39 state of the brain imposes thermodynamic constraints
(Section: Poznanski, 2024).
DOT does not deal with quantum consciousness or assume quantum
brain dynamics. However, according to Poznanski, a Schr¨odinger-like
equation describes the quantum effects within the multiscale
complexity, where multiscale complexity is both functional and struc-
tural through changeable boundary conditions (resulting in the topology
being a holarchical modularity). This is made possible by treating time
consciousness, i.e., “consciousness-in-the-moment,” on a nonlinear
temporal scale and implicitly grounding space to the contingency of
changing boundary conditions. The approach is based on the dynamics of
functional relations (not to be confused with functionalist or relational
theories of consciousness). It is a nonspatial topological framework (not
the mathematical study of “space” in a general sense of topological
spaces) associated with the temporal aspect of the functionality. Here,
functionality refers to the biological realization of the physical as those
features of usefulness that exist subjectively. Therefore, Poznanski says,
it rules out functionalism and focuses on the qualitativeness of brain
functioning. As noted, the approach is type-B materialism (Chalmers,
2003), where consciousness is a physical process, but epistemic objec-
tivism alone does not define physicalism (Shand, 2021). This means that
functionality as the quality of usefulness only refers to physical prop-
erties assessed subjectively, which can be possible only through quan-
tum biological effects.
Moreover, the functional capability of the negentropic state chang-
ing over time must satisfy the following necessary condition for con-
sciousness to arise: the functionality of multiscale complexity must
exceed the functionality of maximum complexity, i.e., FMultiComplexity >
FMaxComplexity. This means that consciousness arises when the function-
ality of multiscale complexity reaches above the functionality of
maximum complexity. This required increase in functionality of multi-
scale complexity is derived from an additional degree of freedom made
possible by quantum biology40 beyond that of the functionality of
maximum complexity as derived from brain structure, dynamics, and
function. FMaxComplexity is an insufficient measure of consciousness.
FMultiComplexity provides an epistemically subjective approach to dynamic
organicity, including self-referential dynamic pathways that give an
extra quality of energy-negentropy exchange for path selection as real-
ization relations. FMultiComplexity is not a step-function but a gradual
ascendance to plateaus accounting for different degrees of conscious-
ness. (Whether this condition is sufficient is beyond DOT to decipher;
something with an equivalent topology could cause consciousness in
other systems.) (Poznanski, 2024).
Poznanski states that “the act of understanding uncertainty is the
main qualifier of consciousness” and “the ’act’ connotes the experi-
enceable form, which is, in essence, a precursor of the experience of
acting.” The process entails the potential for understanding “meaning”
through self-referential dynamical pathways “instead of recognizing (cf.
introspection) sensory information through perceptual channels, form-
ing the basis of understanding uncertainty without relying on memory
recall.” It is not, he says, “coming into existence” because “quantum-
thermal fluctuations are irreducible, yet the process as a whole comes ‘to
exist’ perhaps not instantaneously but appears spontaneously. Its output
38 A type-B materialist “accepts that there is an unclosable epistemic gap, but
denies that there is an ontological gap” (Chalmers, 2003).
39 “Negentropy” is a reduction in entropy and a corresponding increase in
order.
40 Quantum biology does not imply that quantum mechanics applies here. It is
a classical-to-quantum analog approach, based on wave mechanics, that is
sufficient to illustrate the process.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
96
is intentionality as an instruction to act in path selection.”
The self-reference principle, which Poznanski says can replace
emergence and self-organization when dealing with functionality rather
than structure, “establishes dynamical pathways from the microscale to
the macroscale (this includes nonlocal pathways), in which diachronic
causation and how the disunity of causal order in the redundancy creates
a weak unity of consciousness through its temporal structure,” the
inferred purpose giving rise to “a sense of self.”
Poznanski avoids discussing phenomenological properties of con-
sciousness, such as qualia, because, he says, they do “not apply to
conscious reality when considered in the context of functional-structural
realism, an offshoot of structuralism, without relying on introspection.”
Phenomenological consciousness, he says, “appears like a black box of
‘being’ instead of ‘doing.’” However, functional interactions that entail
self-referential dynamics “are uniquely fathomed and, hence, not
phenomenally equivalent in other functional systems.”
Thus, Poznanski concludes, “a living negentropic state that supports
biological function is a dynamic state of being organic representing an
additional degree of freedom for intrinsic information to be structured,
which makes it possible for a dynamic organicity theory of conscious-
ness to take shape in the material brain” (Poznanski, 2024).
11.15. Quantum consciousness extensions
The following theories of consciousness are not quantum theories per
se in that they do not have quantum mechanics as the essence or
generator of consciousness. Rather, each reflects how quantum me-
chanics could facilitate or interact with other theories of consciousness.
All are highly speculative.
Computer scientist Terry Bollinger enjoys speculating about possible
mechanisms of quantum consciousness; these include, non-linear soliton
Schr¨odinger wave models in sensory neural networks; neural dendrites
as antennas for wave collapses; how warm brains might actively main-
tain and manipulate quantum wave functions; and how “quasiparticles”
might enable quantum consciousness by quantizing classical data
transfers between neurons (Bollinger, 2023).
Complexity theorist Sudip Patra posits that mathematical tools used
in quantum science (information theory included) can be also used to
describe cognition; for example, Hilbert space modeling of cognitive
states might provide better descriptions of different features like con-
textuality in decision making, or even exploring ‘entanglement-like’
features of mental states (Patra, 2023; Rooney and Patra, 2022). Though
Patra is agnostic about any underlying physics of consciousness, he
works with Kauffman (11.7) to construct a non-local theory of con-
sciousness outside the constraints of physical space-time.
New-age physician-author Deepak Chopra explains “the intricate
relationship between consciousness and the quantum field” by applying
the same word “field” to both. Consciousness isn’t individual, he says.
“Instead, it is a vast field that individuals share in. This field encom-
passes myriad possibilities. It is the source from which thoughts, sen-
sations, images, and feelings emerge and then dissolve back into, just as
subatomic particles do in the quantum field. Mental experiences and
quanta are transient, shaped by uncertainty, and are, in essence, ener-
getic fluctuations within the consciousness field.” Chopra points to the
infinite nature of the quantum and the consciousness fields, and to the
essential entanglement within each, such that local realism—i.e., the
world of isolated physical objects and mental thoughts—is “out the
window” for both physical and mental phenomena. This entanglement,
he says, “suggests that physical objects are intertwined with perception
and consciousness, blurring the boundaries between the observer and
the observed.” Chopra proposes “a drastic paradigm shift” in which
“consciousness comes first, being the field that is the origin of creation,
acting in concert with the quantum field” (Chopra, 2023a,b).
Philosopher Emmanuel Ransford proposes “quantum panpsychism”
where matter is richer “with an extra content or dimension”—he calls it
“holomatter,” composed of “holoparticles”—and consciousness is “a
nonmaterial content of the world.” It assumes two types of causality:
“out-causation,” causation from outside, out of reach and deterministic;
and “in-causation,” causation from within, unpredictable and “self-wil-
led,” a kind of randomness. Holoparticles, Ransford offers, also have two
parts: one obvious, deterministic and out-causal; the other hidden,
random-looking and in-causal. This hints, he says, that “the randomness
of some quantum events is a smoking-gun evidence of in-causation.” He
adds the “im-im hypothesis,” where “im-im” stands for immaterial and
immanent, and his claimed insight is that the brain is a catalyst of the
mind. “It is a biological ‘lamp’ of sorts that pours out untold sparks of
consciousness instead of untold sparks of light (or photons) in the case of
ordinary lamps.” Indeed, the brain spawning large flows of active and
entangled in-causal holoparticles within the im-im framework would
underpin ordinary consciousness—holoparticles linking quantum and
consciousness. This is why “consciousness, albeit immaterial, needs a
physical structure to ‘catalyze’ it into being” (Ransford, 2023).
Theoretical engineer Edward Kamen proposes that “the human soul
is a type of quantum field,” which interacts with only certain fields in the
physical universe, and not directly with matter. The claim is made that
“fields that interact with the soul field include electromagnetic waves,”
citing as evidence “near-death experiences where events that could not
have been seen through the eyes of the individual are verified.”
Extending the theory, Kamen speculates that because “electric fields and
electromagnetic fields have the same quanta consisting of photons,
electric fields may also interact with the soul field.” This could result in
the transfer of information, he says, from working memory to the soul
through electric fields produced by neural ensembles in the human
brain. Further, the soul field may also affect neurons on the molecular
level, perhaps via electric fields and cytoelectric coupling (Kamen and
Kamen, 2023).
Quantum consciousness: a growth market.
11.16. Rovelli’s relational physics
Physicist Carlo Rovelli focuses on “the profoundly relational aspect
of physics, manifest in general relativity, but especially in quantum
mechanics.” 20th century physics, he says, “is not about how individual
entities are by themselves. It is about how entities manifest themselves
to one another. It is about relations.” This vindicates, he offers, “a very
mild form of panpsychism,” but “this same fact may undermine some of
the motivations for more marked forms of panpsychism” (Rovelli,
2021).
“Although there is nothing specifically psychic or mental in the
relational properties of a system with respect to another system,” Rovelli
says “there is definitely something in common with panpsychism,
because the world is not described from the outside: it is always
described relative to a physical system. So, physical reality is, in our
current physics, perspectival reality” (Dorato, 2016).
Rovelli takes a deflationary view of the hard problem: “If our basic
understanding of the physical world is in terms of more or less complex
systems that interact with one another and affect one another, the
discrepancy between the mental and the physical seems much less
dramatic.” He concludes, “It is a world where physical systems—simple
and complex—manifest themselves to other systems—single and com-
plex—in a way that our physics describes. I see no reason to believe that
this should not be sufficient to account for stones, thunderstorms, and
thoughts” (Dorato, 2016).
According to George Musser, one way to argue that relationalism
could solve the hard problem is, first, to recognize that “third-person
physics isn’t up to the task of explaining first-person experience and,
specifically, its qualitative aspect (qualia).” Then, Rovelli’s approach is
to say that “physics is not, in fact, third-person; it is specific to each of us,
just as each of us has our own private stream of consciousness.” Thus,
“the two sides are not so mismatched after all.” However, Musser adds,
“although physics may well be relational, subjective experience doesn’t
seem to be” (Musser, 2023a,b).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
97
12. Integrated information theory
Integrated Information Theory (IIT), developed by neuroscientist
Giulio Tononi and supported by neuroscientist Christof Koch, is an
original, indeed radical model that states what experience is and what
types of physical systems can have it (Tononi and Koch, 2015). IIT is
grounded in experience, the phenomenology of consciousness, and it
features mathematical description, quantitative measurement, scientific
testability, broad applications, and nonpareil, intrinsic, cause-effect
“structures.” In other words, “IIT addresses the problem of consciousness
starting from phenomenology—the existence of my own experience,
which is immediate and indubitable—rather than from the behavioral,
functional, or neural correlates of experience” (Tononi et al., 2022).
Controversial to be sure, IIT has become a leading theory of
consciousness.41
IIT accounts for consciousness in the following way. First, intro-
spection and reason identify the essential properties of conscious-
ness—the axioms of phenomenal existence. Then, each axiom is
accounted for terms of cause–effect power; that is, “translating” a
“phenomenal property into an essential property of the physical sub-
strate of consciousness” [PSC]—yielding the postulates of physical ex-
istence. In this way, IIT claims to “obtain a set of criteria that a physical
substrate of consciousness (say, a set of cortical neurons) must satisfy”
(Tononi et al., 2022).
IIT asserts that distinct conscious experiences are in a literal sense
distinct kinds of conceptual structures in a radical and heretofore un-
known kind of “qualia space.” IIT says (and introduced the idea) that for
every conscious experience, there is a corresponding mathematical ob-
ject such that the mathematical features of that object are isomorphic to
the properties of the experience.
“Integrated information theory means that you need a very special
kind of mechanism organized in a special kind of way to experience
consciousness,” Tononi says. “A conscious experience is a maximally
reduced conceptual structure in a space called ‘qualia space.’ Think of it
as a shape. But not an ordinary shape—a shape seen from the inside.”
Tononi stresses that simulation is “not the real thing.” To be truly
conscious, he said, an entity must be “of a certain kind that can constrain
its past and future—and certainly a simulation is not of that kind”
(Tononi, 2014b).
Christof Koch envisions how IIT could explain experience—how
consciousness arises out of matter. “The theory makes two fundamental
axiomatic assumptions,” Koch explains. “First, conscious experiences
are unique and there are a vast number of different conscious experi-
ences. Just think of all the frames of all the movies you’ve ever seen or
movies that will ever be made until the end of time. Each one is a unique
visual experience and you can couple that with all the unique auditory
experiences, pain experiences, etc. All possible conscious experiences
are a gigantic number. Second, at the same time, each experience is
integrated—what philosophers refer to as unitary. Whatever I am
conscious of, I am conscious of as a whole. I apprehend as a whole. So,
the idea is to take these two axioms seriously and to cast them into an
information theory framework. Why information theory? Because in-
formation theory deals with different states and their interrelationships.
We don’t think the stuff the brain is made out of is really what’s critical
about consciousness. It’s the interrelationship that’s critical” (Koch,
2012b).
IIT starts from phenomenology itself—a point that Tononi stresses
cannot be overstressed—with axioms that are deemed to be unequivo-
cally and universally true for all instances of consciousness, such that
whatever systems manifest these axioms will ipso facto manifest
consciousness.
It is at this point that IIT seeks a mathematical expression of the
fundamental properties of experience. It is not the reverse: IIT does not
start from mathematics hoping to explain phenomenology; rather it
starts with phenomenology and ends with mathematics (Tononi,
2014a). Because IIT’s consciousness is a purely information-theoretic
property of systems, not limited to brains or even to biology, Tononi
constructs a mathematical function φ (phi) to measure a system’s
informational integration, with levels of φ covarying with degrees of
consciousness (Van Gulick, 2019).
In IIT, each experience, each conscious percept, has clear charac-
teristics: it is specific: it is what it is by how it differs from alternative
experiences; it is unified: irreducible to noninterdependent components;
it is unique: it has its own one-off borders and a particular spatio-tem-
poral grain (Oizumi et al., 2014; Haun and Tononi, 2019).
These pillar concepts, all grounded in experience, are expressed by
five phenomenological axioms: intrinsic existence, composition, infor-
mation, integration and exclusion. These axioms are then formalized
into postulates that prescribe how physical mechanisms, such as neurons
or logic gates, must be configured to generate experience (phenome-
nology). The postulates are used to define integrated information as
information specified by a whole that cannot be reduced to that speci-
fied by its parts (Tononi and Koch, 2015).
Each of IIT’s five postulates defines and constrains the properties
required of physical mechanisms to support consciousness (Tononi and
Koch, 2015).
(i) Intrinsic Existence. Consciousness exists of its own inherent na-
ture: each experience is real, and it exists from its own inherent
perspective; to account for experience, a system of mechanisms in
a state must exist intrinsically and it must have cause–effect
power.
(ii) Composition. Consciousness is structured: each experience is
composed of phenomenological distinctions; the system must be
structured: subsets of system elements (composed in various
combinations) must have cause–effect power upon the system.
(iii) Information. Consciousness is specific: each experience is the
particular way it is; the system must specify a cause–effect-
enabling structure that is the particular way it is; the system has a
set of specific cause–effect repertoires that distinguishes it from
all other possible structures (differentiation).
(iv) Integration. Consciousness is unified: each experience is irre-
ducible to noninterdependent subsets of phenomenal distinc-
tions; the cause–effect structure specified by the system must be
unified: it must be intrinsically irreducible.
(v) Exclusion. Consciousness is definite, in content and spatio-tem-
poral grain: each experience has the set of phenomenal distinc-
tions it has, not less or more, and flows at the speed it does, not
faster or slower; the cause–effect structure specified by the system
must be definite and is maximally irreducible intrinsically
(“conceptual structure”).
It is this conceptual structure that is especially intriguing. Maximally
irreducible intrinsically, it is also known as a “quale” (plural: qualia). Its
arguably infinite varieties are formed when higher-order mechanisms
specify concepts, with the constellation of all concepts specifying the
overall form or shape of the quale. On this basis, Tononi and Koch
formulate the central identity of IIT quite simply: an experience is iden-
tical to a conceptual structure that is maximally irreducible intrinsically
(Tononi and Koch, 2015).
Questions that IIT seeks to address: Why the cerebral cortex gives rise
to consciousness but the cerebellum does not, though the latter has even
more neurons and appears to be just as complex? Is consciousness pre-
sent in coma patients, preterm infants, non-mammalian species? Can
computers, artificial intelligence (e.g., large language models) become
conscious as humans are conscious?
41 I do not give Integrated Information Theory its own category because I think
IIT is the leading theory of consciousness. I do so because IIT is (i) a leading
theory; (ii) original in premises and approach; (iii) controversial; and (iv) it
would be misleading if classified in any of the other categories.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
98
Most relevant to our Landscape is IIT’s fundamental ontology. Put
simply, it begins with “the ontological primacy of phenomenal exis-
tence.” The proper understanding of consciousness, IIT states, is “true
existence, captured by its intrinsic powers ontology: what truly exists, in
physical terms, are intrinsic entities, and only what truly exists can
cause” (Tononi et al., 2022).
Seeking to embed its theory of consciousness within a coherent
metaphysical framework, IIT introduces its “0th postulate” or “principle
of being.” To exist physically, IIT states, “means to have cause–effect
power—being able to take and make a difference. In other words,
physical existence is defined purely operationally, from the extrinsic
perspective of a conscious observer, with no residual ‘intrinsic’ prop-
erties (such as mass or charge). Furthermore, physical existence should
be conceived of as cause–effect power all the way down—namely down
to the finest, ‘atomic’ units that can take and make a difference” (Tononi
et al., 2022).
IIT deep conclusion is that “only a substrate that unfolds into a
maximum of intrinsic, structured, specific, irreducible cause–effect
power—an intrinsic entity—can account for the essential properties of
phenomenal existence in physical terms.” IIT goes on to claim that “only
an intrinsic entity can be said to exist intrinsically—to exist for itself, in
an absolute sense. By contrast, if something has cause–effect power but
does not qualify as an intrinsic entity, it can only be said to exist
extrinsically—to exist for something else—say, for an external observ-
er—in a relative sense. And intrinsic, absolute existence is the only ex-
istence worth having—what we might call true existence. Said
otherwise, an intrinsic entity is the only entity worth being.”
In a crucial move, according to Tononi and colleagues, “IIT asserts an
explanatory identity: an experience is identical to a Φ-structure. In other
words, the phenomenal properties of an experience—its quality or how
it feels—correspond one-to-one to the physical properties of the cause-
–effect structure unfolded from the physical substrate of consciousness.
Thus, all the contents of an experience here and now—including spatial
extendedness; temporal flow; objects; colors and sounds; thoughts, in-
tentions, decisions, and beliefs; doubts and convictions; hopes and fears;
memories and expectations—correspond to sub-structures in a cause-
–effect structure (Ф-folds in a Ф-structure)” (Tononi et al., 2022).
This means that “all contents of experience correspond to sub-
structures within a maximally irreducible cause–effect structure—to
Φ-folds within a Φ-structure. This applies not only to the experience of
space, time, and objects, but also to conscious thoughts and feelings of
any kind … Conscious alternatives, too, are Φ-folds within the
Φ-structure corresponding to an experience.
Fundamentally, then, it is IIT’s claim that when one is conscious,
“what actually exists is a large Ф-structure corresponding to my expe-
rience, and it exists at its particular grain. No subsets, supersets, or
parasets of that Ф-structure also exist, just as no other grains also exist.
Moreover, what actually exists is only the Ф-structure corresponding to
my experience, not also an associated physical substrate. Crucially, any
content of my experience, including alternatives, reasons, and decisions,
corresponds to a sub-structure [i.e., Φ-folds] within my Ф-structure, not
to a functional property emerging from my [neural] substrate (Tononi
et al., 2022).
Because “IIT starts from phenomenal existence and defines physical
existence operationally in terms of cause–effect power ‘all the way
down,’ with no intrinsic residue, such as mass and charge … a physical
substrate should not be thought of as an ontological or ‘substantial’
basis—an ontological substrate—constituted of elementary particles
that would exist as such, endowed with intrinsic properties.”
This means, according to IIT, “because I actually exist—as a large
intrinsic entity—the neurons of my substrate as such but the Ф-structure
expressing its causal powers … Moreover, because my alternatives,
reasons, and decisions exist within my experience—as sub-structures
within an intrinsic entity—the neuronal substrates of alternatives, rea-
sons, and decisions cannot also exist.” If this picture is correct, IIT claims
controversially, “it leaves no room for emergence or dualism of any sort”
(Tononi et al., 2022).
As a defining corollary to its radical theory of consciousness, IIT
claims that true free will exists, based on “the proper understanding of
experience as true existence and on the intrinsic powers view: what truly
exists, in physical terms, are intrinsic entities, and only what truly exists
can cause.” In contrast, in materialistic theories, with ontological and
causal micro-determination, much of the debate about free will has
revolved not around existence but around determinism/indeterminism,
so that true free will is incompatible (Tononi et al., 2022).
In the same set of “adversarial collaboration” experiments that tested
Global Workspace Theory (9.2.3), IIT was also subjected to the puta-
tively rigorous protocols (Templeton World Charity Foundation, n.d.).
“The specific IIT prediction examined was that consciousness is a kind of
“structure” in the brain formed by a particular type of neuronal con-
nectivity that is active for as long as a given experience, say, seeing an
image, is occurring. This structure is said to be in the posterior cortex
(the occipital, parietal, and temporal cortices in the back part of the
brain). Preliminary results indicate that while “areas in the posterior
cortex do contain information in a sustained manner”—which could be
taken as evidence that the “structure” postulated by the theory is being
observed—the independent “theory-neutral” researchers didn’t find
sustained synchronization between different areas of the brain, as had
been predicted. Preliminary brain-scanning data to calculate φ for
simplified models of specific neural networks within the human brain,
such as the visual cortex, seem to correlate with states of consciousness
(Lenharo, 2023a,b, 2024). Scanning the brain as people “slip into
anesthesia” is said to offer support for IIT by calculating phi “for
simplified models of specific neural networks within the human brain
that have known functions, such as the visual cortex” (Wilson, 2023)—
though, by all accounts, the empirical neuroscience of IIT is still
rudimentary.
More recently, Koch defines IIT’s consciousness as “unfolded
intrinsic causal power, the ability to effect change, a property associated
with any system of interacting components, be they neurons or tran-
sistors. Consciousness is a structure, not a function, a process, or a
computation.” He calls out “the theory’s insistence that consciousness
must be incorporated into the basic description of what exists, at the
rock-bottom level of reality”—a claim that “has also drawn considerable
fire from opponents.” He explains that IIT “quantifies the amount of
consciousness of any system by its integrated information, character-
izing the system’s irreducibility. The more integrated information a
system possesses, the more it is conscious. Systems with a lot of inte-
gration, such as the adult human brain, have the freedom to choose; they
possess free will” (Koch, 2024, p. 16).
Personally, I see IIT operating in three dimensions. First, measure-
ment: IIT is a test of consciousness, assessing what things are conscious,
and in those things that are, quantifying the degree of consciousness (e.
g., coma patients). Second, mechanism: IIT can predict brain structures
and functions involved in consciousness. Third, ontology (the most
controversial): IIT speculates that the conceptual structures of qualia are
“located” in some kind of “qualia space” (13.5).
The first two dimensions, IIT’s measurement and mechanism, could
sit comfortably in the Materialism Theories area of the Landscape. The
third, IIT’s ontology of qualia, is radically distinct, its classification
unclear—which is part of the reason why I have given IIT its own
category on the Landscape.42
IIT claims that integrated information is both necessary and suffi-
cient for consciousness: necessary seems uncontroversial; sufficient is
42 In attempting to classify IIT’s ontology of “conceptual structures in qualia
spaces,” one could make a case that IIT could be a form of Panpsychism, a kind
of Dualism, or part of a much-enhanced Materialism. IIT leaders reject Dualism,
distance themselves from Panpsychism (13.2), and probably would argue that,
to subsume IIT, Materialism as currently practiced would need to be stretched
to the snapping point.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
99
the rub to many. But what I especially like about IIT’s “conceptual
structures” in “qualia space” is that IIT makes a stake-in-the-ground
commitment to what consciousness per se may literally be—an appre-
ciated rarity on the Landscape of consciousness (which does not mean
that I subscribe to it).
12.1. Critiques of integrated information theory
IIT has its critics, of course, as should every scientific theory. Some
like to highlight IIT’s “anti-common sense” predictions imputing con-
sciousness to objects and things that just do not in any way seem to be
conscious. The early exchange between theoretical quantum computer
scientist Scott Aaronson and Giulio Tononi is illuminating (Aaronson,
2014a, 2014b, 2014c; Tononi, 2014a).
More sensational, though not necessarily more illuminating, is the
open letter from 124 neuroscientists and philosophers, including leading
names, that characterizes IIT as “pseudoscience,” a damning descriptor
that relegates IIT with the likes of astrology, alchemy, flat Earth and
homeopathy. The impact is such that one can no longer discuss IIT
without referencing the letter (Fleming et al., 2023).
The letter is titled “The Integrated Information Theory of Con-
sciousness as Pseudoscience” and it expresses concerns that the media,
including both Nature and Science magazines “celebrated” IIT as “a
‘leading’ and empirically tested theory of consciousness”—prior to peer-
review. Moreover, the letter criticizes the large-scale adversarial
collaboration project as testing only “some idiosyncratic predictions
made by certain theorists, which are not really logically related to the
core ideas of IIT.” The letter concludes, “As researchers, we have a duty
to protect the public from scientific misinformation”—thereby igniting a
firestorm in consciousness studies (Fleming et al., 2023).
Nature called it an “uproar” (Lenharo, 2023a,b). Responding,
Christof Koch said, “IIT is a theory, of course, and therefore may be
empirically wrong,” but it makes its assumptions very clear—for
example, that consciousness has a physical basis and can be mathe-
matically measured.
David Chalmers was quick to comment: “IIT has many problems, but
‘pseudoscience’ is like dropping a nuclear bomb over a regional dispute.
It’s disproportionate, unsupported by good reasoning, and does vast
collateral damage to the field far beyond IIT. As in Vietnam: ‘We had to
destroy the field in order to save it’” (Chalmers, 2023).
Hakwan Lau, one of the lead co-authors of the open letter, writes in
an extended response to the “uproar” that “it is already false to char-
acterize IIT, a panpsychist theory, as being empirically tested at all in a
meaningful way.” He argues that the entire field, including his own
theory, is not at the stage where predictions can logically apply, stating
“the advertised goal of really testing and potentially falsifying theories is
unrealistic, given where the field is at the moment.” Lau concludes by
doubling down: “The world has now seen the nature of the conflicts and
problems in our field, which can no longer be unseen. As a matter of fact,
a sizable group of researchers think that IIT is pseudoscience” (Lau,
2023).
To physicist-neuroscientist Alex Gomez-Marin, “IIT ticks too many
nonmaterialist boxes. There is academic hate for nonphysicalist speech
… Cancel culture has unfortunately landed in the sciences, and just now
in neuroscience. Using the pseudo-word is a pseudo-argument akin to
name-calling to get rid of people … We have the responsibility to tell the
truth, to the best of our ability” (Gomez-Marin, 2023).
My own view straddles the barbed fence. On one side, I agree that IIT
has more weight than warrant in the pop-sci and even scientific com-
munities, and that the results of the adversarial collaboration experi-
ments, even if they could achieve their preset objectives, would not,
perhaps could not, justify the core IIT theory. Moreover, the one-on-one
adversarial experiments in general, with their high publicity, give the
inappropriate impression that the two protagonists are the finalists in a
theory-of-consciousness “run off,” as it were, when in fact there are
many dozens of other theories, nonphysical as well as physical, still in
the game.
On the other side, I do not sign on to the “pseudoscience” branding;
just because IIT may not be subject to traditional kinds of scientific
methodologies, such as falsification, does not ipso facto force it out of
bounds. (The multiverse in cosmology faces similar kinds of criticism.43)
It could be that discerning consciousness escapes traditional science
methodologies, as would a majority of theory-categories on this Land-
scape (not that discerning truth is a democratic process).
12.2. Koch compares integrated information theory with panpsychism
Neuroscientist Christof Koch states that Integrated Information
Theory (IIT) shares many intuitions with panpsychism (13), in particular
that “consciousness is an intrinsic fundamental property of reality, is
graded, and can be found in small amounts in simple physical systems.”
Unlike panpsychism, Koch continues, IIT “articulates which systems are
conscious and which ones are not [partially] resolving panpsychism’s
combination problem and why consciousness can be adaptive.” The
systemic weakness of panpsychism, or any other-ism, he says, “is that
they fail to offer a protracted conceptual, let alone empirical, research
program that yields novel insights or proposes new experiments” (Koch,
2021).
While uncertainty in theoretical development and inconceivability of
empirical experiments are indeed weaknesses, should they ipso facto
disqualify the theory? Experimental verification of string theory seems
impossible because the energy levels required are many orders of
magnitude larger than instrumentation could ever be built, and while
some argue that this incapacity to be falsified should indeed disqualify
string theory as a scientific theory, many string theorists disagree,
betting their careers on it.
Koch’s comparing IIT with panpsychism provides insight into both.
Although admitting “I’ve always had a secret crush on the singular
beauty of panpsychism,” Koch counts himself among those surprised by
its resurgence. He claims that IIT addresses several major shortcomings
of panpsychism—“it explains why consciousness is adaptive, it explains
the different qualitative aspects of consciousness (why a ‘kind of blue’
feels different from a stinky Limburger cheese), and it head-on addresses
the combination problem”—per IIT’s exclusion postulate, only systems
with a maximum of Φ have intrinsic existence and are conscious” (Koch,
2021).
The exclusion postulate, Koch explains, “dictates whether or not an
aggregate of entities—ants in a colony, cells making up a tree, bees in a
hive, starlings in a murmurating flock, an octopus with its eight semi-
autonomous arms, and so on—exist as a unitary conscious entity or not.”
Koch claims that IIT “offers a startling counter-example to Goff’s
claim that qualitative aspects of conscious experience cannot be
captured by quantitative considerations”—“a detailed, mathematical
account of how the phenomenology of two-dimensional space, say an
empty canvas, can be fully accounted for in terms of intrinsic causal
powers of the associated physical substrate, here a very simple, grid-like
neural network” (Koch, 2021, quoting Huang, ). Integrated Information
Theory may well be wrong, Koch says, but it “provides proof-of-principle
for how quantitative primary qualities (here intrinsic causal power of
simple model neurons that can be numerically computed; it doesn’t get
more quantitative than that) correspond to secondary qualities—the
experience of looking at a blank wall” (Koch, 2021). (For Goff’s
response, 13.8.)
13. Panpsychisms
Panpsychism is the theory that phenomenal consciousness exists
because physical ultimates, fundamental physics, have phenomenal or
43 We do not carry the multiverse analogy too far, because the multiverse has
more independent theoretical motivations and mechanisms.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
100
proto-phenomenal properties. This means that the essence of mentality,
awareness, experience is a primitive, non-reducible feature of each and
every part or aspect of physical reality, similar to the fundamental fields
and particles in physics. Everywhere there is energy-matter, perhaps
everywhere there is even spacetime, panpsychism says there is also
something of consciousness. Everything that exists has a kind of inherent
“proto-consciousness” which, in certain aggregates and under certain
conditions, can generate inner awareness and experience. Panpsychism
has multiple forms, nuances, and variants, as one would expect.
Panpsychism is one of the oldest theories in philosophy of mind,
going back to pre-modern animistic religions, the ancient Greeks,
Leibniz’s monads, and a host of 19th century thinkers (Goff et al., 2022).
Of late, in reaction to the seemingly intractable hard problem of con-
sciousness, panpsychism has been gathering adherents and gaining
momentum, especially among some analytic philosophers.
Panpsychism has strong non-Western roots, not often explored. In
particular, the ideas and arguments from Indian philosophical tradi-
tions—especially Ved¯anta, Yog¯ac¯ara Buddhism, and ´Saiva Non-
dualism—can enrich contemporary debates about panpsychism
(Maharaj, 2020).
Panpsychism is also finding new supporters. Take “Kabbalah Pan-
psychism,” an interpretation of the Jewish mystical tradition that un-
derstands consciousness to be holographically and hierarchically
organized, relativistic, and capable of downward causation (Schipper,
2021).
Yujin Nagasawa provides a careful critique of panpsychism, arguing
that although it seems promising, it reaches “a cognitive dead end” in
that “even if it’s true, we can’t prove it.” He challenges so-called
constitutive Russellian panpsychism (14.1), which many consider to be
the most efficacious panpsychist approach to the hard problem of con-
sciousness, by arguing that it “seems caught in a deadlock: we are
cognitively unable to show how microphenomenal properties can
aggregate to yield macrophenomenal properties (or how cosmopheno-
menal properties can be segmented to yield macrophenomenal proper-
ties)” (Nagasawa, 2021).
Panpsychism’s revival, indeed its flourishing, has left some philos-
ophers (as well as scientists) dumbfounded and dismayed. (I’d feel
remiss if I did not make an exception and at least recognize panpsy-
chism’s critics.) When I asked John Searle about panpsychism’s
increasing scholarly acceptance, he said, “I don’t think that’s a serious
view. If you’ve got panpsychism, you know you’ve made a mistake. And
the reason is that consciousness comes in discrete units. There has to be a
place where my consciousness ends and your consciousness begins. It
can’t just be spread over the universe like a thin veneer of jam. Pan-
psychism has the result that everything is conscious, and you can’t make
a coherent statement of that” ( Searle, 2014a).
To physicist Sean Carroll, “our current knowledge of physics should
make us skeptical of hypothetical modifications of the known rules, and
that without such modifications it’s hard to imagine how intrinsically
mental aspects could play a useful explanatory role.” Part of the reason is
the “causal closure of the physical” such that “Without dramatically
upending our understanding of quantum field theory, there is no room
for any new influences that could bear on the problem of consciousness.”
Other than materialism/physicalism, Carroll characterizes all theories of
consciousness, including panpsychism, thus: “To start with the least
well-understood aspects of reality and draw sweeping conclusions about
the best-understood aspects is arguably the tail wagging the dog”
(Carroll, 2021).
Here I array the nature and kinds of panpsychism on offer. I then
summarize the perspectives of several well-known panpsychists.
13.1. Micropsychism
Proponents position panpsychism as a solution to the vexing prob-
lems of both materialism and dualism: replacing materialism’s apparent
impotence to account for consciousness and avoiding dualism’s sharply
bifurcated reality (Goff et al., 2022). The challenge, according to
Chalmers, is how microphysical properties, characterized by a
completed physics, relate to phenomenal (or experiential) properties,
the most familiar of which is simply the property of phenomenal con-
sciousness (Chalmers, 2013).
If panpsychism is correct, Chalmers says, there is microexperience
and there are microphenomenal properties, which are obviously very
different from human experience. Though a proper panpsychist theory
of consciousness is currently lacking, some progress can be made.
Chalmers posits “constitutive panpsychism” as the thesis that mac-
roexperience is (wholly or partially) grounded in microexperience. It is
the thesis that microexperiences somehow add up to yield macro-
experience. “Nonconstitutive panpsychism” holds that microexperience
does not ground the macroexperience; rather, macroexperience is
strongly emergent from microexperience and/or from microphysics
(Chalmers, 2013).
In either case, traditional panpsychism is micropsychism, the posi-
tion that all facts of panpsychism are formed at the micro-level. Two
forms are distinguished, based on which aspect of mentality is privileged
to be fundamental and ubiquitous: thought (pancognitivism) and con-
sciousness (panexperientialism).
Panpsychism’s thorniest problem, long recognized, is the “combi-
nation problem”: How could micro-level entities with their own very
basic forms of conscious experience somehow come together in brains to
constitute human and animal conscious experience? The problem is
severe: How could minuscule conscious subjects of rudimentary expe-
rience somehow coalesce to form macroscopic conscious subjects with
complex experiences? (Goff et al., 2022).
13.2. Panprotopsychism
Panprotopsychism is distinguished from panpsychism in that the
most basic protophenomenal properties are not themselves forms of
consciousness, but rather must combine to generate forms of con-
sciousness. Panprotopsychism would then be a kind of “emergent pan-
psychism,” with the “phenomenal magic” requiring actions at two
levels. Such emergence could be weak or strong, depending on whether
one could in principle explain with perfection, solely from all the rele-
vant facts about protophenomenal properties, all the relevant facts
about phenomenal properties as manifest in conscious creatures (Goff
et al., 2022).
“Panqualityism” is the view that protophenomenal properties are
thin unexperienced qualities, whereas our conscious experience is thick
with experienced qualities. Their challenge is to explain how such
unexperienced qualities come to be experienced (Goff et al., 2022).
13.3. Cosmopsychism
Cosmopsychism reverses the standard explanatory ontology that
facts about big things are grounded in facts about small things. It posits
that facts about little things are grounded in facts about big things. In
other words, all things ultimately exist and are the way they are because
of certain facts about the universe as a whole. Following the argument to
its logical conclusion, there would be one and only one fundamental
thing: the universe (Goff et al., 2022).
The minimal commitment of cosmopsychism is that the universe is in
some sense “conscious.” But just as micropsychism can have quantum
particles with experience but no thought, so cosmopsychism can have
the universe with some kind of experience, but without thought or
agency.
Philip Goff makes a grander case. He develops a form of cosmopsy-
chism, according to which the universe is a value-responding agent, an
ultimate explanation motivated to account for the fine-tuning of the
laws of physics and for the emergence of life and mind. He states that
assuming fine-tuning needs explanation (it is not “an implausible
fluke”), then there are three prime categories to evaluate: theism,
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
101
multiverse, and “agent cosmopsychism.” He argues that “agentive cos-
mopsychism is more theoretically virtuous than theism” because “God”
would require “a commitment to both physical and non-physical kinds,
and to both necessary and contingent kinds.” Similarly, on the multi-
verse, he argues that “its structural complexity is realized by an astro-
nomical number of distinct individuals” that “we cannot directly
observe,” whereas on agentive cosmopsychism, “the structural
complexity is realized by the properties of a single individual,” so there
is no need to “postulate a single new individual.” Goff reasons that
agentive cosmopsychism is more parsimonious in that it requires “only
one causal capacity rather than multiple” (Goff, 2019a,b). In his book,
Why? The Purpose of the Universe, Goff calls this third way “teleological
cosmopsychism”—some kind of conscious cosmos with some kind of
goal-directed intent (Goff, 2023).
Thus, Goff rejects both theism and multiverse as explanations of fine-
tuning, claiming that each has prediction errors and insurmountable
problems. He focuses on the one universe that we have and know to be
real, “merely” adding some new properties. “The universe is a conscious
mind,” he concludes, “with purposes of its own” that are “still unfolding”
(Goff, 2023).
Yujin Nagasawa makes a novel case for cosmopsychism by drawing
parallels between the relationship between mind and body in philoso-
phy of mind and the relationship between God and cosmos in philosophy
of religion. In analyzing articulations between panpsychism and cos-
mopsychism in philosophy of mind, and between polytheism and
pantheism in philosophy of religion, he argues that by replacing divinity
with phenomenality in pantheism we can derive cosmopsychism, and
that doing so undercuts the combination problem (panpsychism’s
greatest challenge). He claims that using a top-down approach (with
which he derives polytheism from pantheism) in conjunction with
endorsing cosmopsychism, “the consciousness of the cosmos is onto-
logically prior to the consciousnesses of individuals like us.” This, he
says, avoids the combination problem (Nagasawa, 2019).
Sophisticated arguments for cosmopsychism come from Indian phi-
losophy. Swami Vivekananda, the 19th century Indian monk who
introduced Hinduism and Ved¯anta to the West, champions (with his
followers) a distinctive form of cosmopsychism, a panentheistic cos-
mopsychism, according to which the sole reality is Divine Conscious-
ness, which manifests as everything and everyone in the universe
(Medhananda, 2022).
13.4. Qualia force
In the theory of Qualia Force, consciousness is a deep feature of
physical reality that emerges from the fields and particles of funda-
mental physics, perhaps in the strong emergence sense that it cannot be
explained by fundamental physics, even with knowledge beyond the
current, even in principle. This qualia force differs from traditional
panpsychism, where consciousness is co-fundamental with the deepest
laws of physics. Although in some sense derivative from the funda-
mental laws of physics, this qualia force sustains its own faculties and
capacities.
13.5. Qualia space
In the theory of Qualia Space, consciousness is an independent, non-
reducible feature of reality that exists in addition to the deepest laws of
fundamental physics (i.e., the four forces, spacetime, mass-energy). This
heretofore unknown qualia-space aspect of the world may take the form
of a radically new structure or organization of reality, perhaps a
different dimension of reality.
The clearest current example would be Integrated Information
Theory’s (IIT) “conceptual structures” in qualia space (12). While this
radically novel feature might suggest that IIT should be classified as a
Panpsychism variant, I prefer to keep IIT independent but recognize the
implicit connection by including “qualia space”
here under
Panpsychism. Note that IIT makes no claim that IIT’s qualia space is
ubiquitous in reality, as it would need be for IIT to be classic panpsychist
in nature (Tononi and Koch, 2015). I can imagine other, distinct, non-IIT
theories of consciousness founded on qualia-space.
In addition, the Qualia Research Institute’s (QRI) “State-Space
Consciousness Via Qualia Formalism and Valence Realism” holds that
phenomenal properties are a fundamental feature of the world and
aren’t spontaneously created only when a certain computation is being
performed” (Qualia Research Institute, n.d.). Although it “mostly fits
well with a panpsychist view,” QRI members prefer to classify them-
selves as a dual-aspect or neutral monism (6).
13.6. Chalmers’s panpsychism
Panpsychism’s renaissance can be attributed, at least in part, to
philosopher David Chalmers, who has long entertained panpsychism as
a possibly viable theory of consciousness (Chalmers, 1996; 2007; 2014a;
2014b; 2016c). “To find a place for consciousness within the natural
order,” he wrote, “we must either revise our conception of conscious-
ness, or revise our conception of nature” (Chalmers, 2003). This sen-
tence prepares the way, as it were, because if one is unwilling to deflate
consciousness (as a kind of illusion), then one has no choice but to
expand nature.
In his early work, Chalmers raised panpsychism, tentatively, in the
context of his kind of dualism. “I resisted mind-body dualism for a long
time, but I have now come to the point where I accept it, not just as the
only tenable view but as a satisfying view in its own right. It is always
possible that I am confused, or that there is a new and radical possibility
that I have overlooked; but I can comfortably say that I think dualism is
very likely true. I have also raised the possibility of a kind of panpsy-
chism. Like mind-body dualism, this is initially counterintuitive, but the
counterintuitiveness disappears with time. I am unsure whether the
view is true or false, but it is at least intellectually appealing, and on
reflection it is not too crazy to be acceptable” (Chalmers, 1996; Doyle, n.
d.a).
While Chalmers’s initial considerations of panpsychism were
perhaps motivated by a “when-all-else-fails” perspective, his more
recent papers address complex philosophical issues inherent in pan-
psychism (Chalmers, 2013).
Chalmers divides the most important views on the metaphysics of
consciousness “almost exhaustively into six classes,” three involving
broadly reductive views, “seeing consciousness as a physical process
that involves no expansion of a physical ontology,” and three involving
broadly nonreductive views, “on which consciousness involves some-
thing irreducible in nature, and requires expansion or reconception of a
physical ontology.” Chalmers’s sixth class embeds panpsychism44
(Chalmers, 2003).
Panpsychism, more formally, is the theory that “consciousness is
constituted by the intrinsic properties of fundamental physical entities:
that is, by the categorical bases of fundamental physical dispositions. On
this view, phenomenal or protophenomenal properties are located at the
fundamental level of physical reality, and in a certain sense, underlie
physical reality itself” (Chalmers, 2003).
In one line of argument, channeling Hegel, Chalmers starts with the
thesis of materialism and the antithesis of dualism, and reaches the
synthesis of panpsychism. This synthesis encounters the antithesis of
panprotopsychism (13.2), from which he reaches the new synthesis of
Russellian monism (14.1). This synthesis encounters the new antithesis
of the combination problem, and whether there can be a new synthesis,
Chalmers avers, remains an open question. Still, he argues that there is
“good reason to take both panpsychism and panprotopsychism very
44 The sixth class is labeled “Monism,” which means only one of a kind of
fundamental stuff, a stuff with both phenomenal and physical properties
(Chalmers, 2003).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
102
seriously,” and he concludes boldly: “If we can find a reasonable solution
to the combination problem for either, this view would immediately
become the most promising solution to the mind-body problem”
(Chalmers, 2016a).
Chalmers has explored all the major non-materialism theories,
including Quantum Theories (Chalmers and McQueen, 2022) and
Idealism (Chalmers, 2020d) as well as Panpsychism, not wholly
committing to any one. Although he favors Panpsychism, he recognizes
its problems (Chalmers, 1996; 2007; 2014a; 2014b; 2016c).
13.7. Strawson’s panpsychism
Philosopher Galen Strawson calls panpsychism “the most parsimo-
nious, plausible and indeed ‘hard-nosed’ position that any physicalist
who is remotely realistic about the nature of reality can take up in the
present state of our knowledge” (Strawson, 2008, 2011). Conversely, he
calls the denial of “conscious experience, the subjective character of
experience, the ‘what-it-is-like’ of experience,” in his words, “the silliest
claim ever made” (Strawson, 2018).
Strawson is a sophisticated (and unabashed) champion of panpsy-
chism, yet I decided to classify his theory under Monism (14), the next
category, not here under Panpsychism. The reason is the prominence of
his argument to subsume panpsychism under his enlarged understand-
ing of “materialism” or “physicalism”—amplified by his insistence that,
in essence, committing to panpsychism makes one a “real materialist” or
“real physicalist” (Strawson, 2009) (14.4.). Strawson’s social construc-
tivist view: “Panpsychism is not a new theory, but it is newly popular,
and it is still widely held to be ‘absurd’. It remains to be seen whether it
will ever advance to ‘obvious’”45 (Strawson, 2019b).
13.8. Goff’s panpsychism
Philosopher Philip Goff starts from the premise “one thing that sci-
ence could never show is that consciousness does not exist” and he
mounts a vigorous, rigorous case for panpsychism, the staggering idea
(at least initially) that “consciousness is a fundamental and ubiquitous
feature of the physical world.” He positions consciousness as “funda-
mental to what we are as human beings,” “the source of much that is of
value in existence,” “the ground of our identity and a source of great
value,” and “the only thing we know for certain is real.” He sets up the
explanatory tension: “Nothing is more certain than consciousness, and
yet nothing is harder to incorporate into our scientific picture of the
world” (Goff, 2019a,b).
Goff sets out to undermine materialism’s traditional argument that
neuroscience has both made enormous advances, evincing its power,
and it has a long way to go, explaining its lack of success. None of the
neuroscientific advances, Goff says, “has shed any light on how the brain
produces consciousness” and while many neuroscientists take this as
evidence that one day neuroscience will “crack the mystery of con-
sciousness,” Goff turns their argument around and claims it is evidence
that the cause of consciousness differs in kind from the causes of other
scientific problems. “Explaining consciousness will require a change in
our understanding of what science is,” he argues; this is because “the
scientific revolution itself was premised on putting consciousness
outside of the domain of scientific inquiry” (i.e., Galileo’s Error). “If we
ever want to solve the problem of consciousness,” he declares, “we will
need to find a way of putting it back” (Goff, 2019a,b).
Goff positions panpsychism as conceding that “there is an element of
truth” in each of the claims of naturalistic dualism, that immaterial
minds are part of the natural order, and materialism, that the physical
world will ultimately explain inner experience. No doubt, as Goff states,
“An increasing number of philosophers and even some neuroscientists
are coming around to the idea that it [panpsychism] may be our best
hope for solving the problem of consciousness” (Goff, 2019a,b). It’s
fascinating to explore why.
Targeting each of the major competing theories of consciousness,
Goff claims to show their inadequacies—which, given the challenge of
explaining consciousness, is not the most difficult of tasks. Goff defends
panpsychism, stressing arguments from simplicity and parsimony.
Panpsychism, obviously, has its own problems—especially the pesky
combination problem—which Goff gamely addresses. His debates with
intellectual opponents are probative (Kastrup, 2020a, 2020b).
Goff responds to Christof Koch’s “startling counter-example to Goff’s
claim that qualitative aspects of conscious experience cannot be
captured by quantitative considerations” (4.2). But while Goff voices
“no doubt that we can in principle map out the quantitative structure of
visual experience in mathematical language,” he denies that such a
mathematical description can fully capture the qualities that fill out that
structure. If it could, he says, “we could use the mathematical descrip-
tion to explain to a colorblind neuroscientist what it’s like to see color,”
which, he says, is absurd. Purely quantitative language entails an
“explanatory limitation,” Goff contends, and “if a purely quantitative
theory can’t even convey the qualities of experience, then it certainly
can’t reductively account for them” (Goff, 2021).
In a special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies dedicated to
Goff’s panpsychism, Goff responds extensively to commentators and
critics (Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2021). He frames his argument
broadly: “The problem of consciousness is rooted in the philosophical
foundations of science” such that “we can’t account for the qualities of
consciousness in the purely quantitative language of physical science”
(Goff, 2021).
In his multifaceted replies to scientists, Goff stresses science’s
explanatory limitation and he is not persuaded that the various argu-
ments, such as Rovelli’s relational or perspectival approach (11.16), can
solve the “two aspects of consciousness that give rise to a hard problem:
qualitivity and subjectivity”46—either, in Goff’s view, would be “suffi-
cient to refute materialism” (Goff, 2021).
In his multifaceted replies to philosophers, Goff focuses on panpsy-
chism’s combination problem and offers a form of “hybrid panpsy-
chism,” which distinguishes sharply “between subjects and their
experiences, holding that the former are ‘strongly emergent’ (i.e., they
can’t be reductively explained) whilst the latter are ‘weakly emergent’
(i.e., they can be reductively explained, in terms of consciousness at the
level of physics)” (Goff, 2021).
Thus, Goff addresses the challenge that strong emergent panpsy-
chism, which postulates fundamental psychophysical laws of nature,
suffers problems similar to those of dualism, and weak emergent pan-
psychism, without such extra laws, suffers problems similar to those of
physicalism. He argues that this "new hybrid of the strong and weak
emergentist forms of panpscyhism"—where "subjects of experience are
strongly emergent but their phenomenal properties are weakly
emergent"—is a form of cosmopsychism rather than micropsychism
(Goff, 2024).
In his multifaceted replies to theologians, Goff disputes the notion
that “the case for panpsychism should also lead one to theism,” because,
for one, a “self-explainer” can be the universe itself; God is not the only
choice here (Goff, 2021).
13.9. A. Harris’s panpsychism as fundamental field
Neuroscience/consciousness writer Annaka Harris posits that “con-
sciousness isn’t self-centered” and that we should “think of
45 Strawson’s quote follows his reference to William James: “‘First, you know,
a new theory is attacked as absurd,’ William James once remarked; ‘then it is
admitted to be true, but obvious and insignificant; finally it is seen to be so
important that its adversaries claim that they themselves discovered it.’”
46 Goff in “Chalmers’s Hard Problem of Consciousness,” near the beginning of
this paper.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
103
consciousness like spacetime—a fundamental field that’s everywhere.”
In Conscious, her “meditation on the self, free will, and felt experience,”
she wonders whether “we’ve been thinking about the problem back-
ward. Rather than consciousness arising when non-conscious matter
behaves a particular way, is it possible that consciousness is an intrinsic
property of matter—that it was there all along?” (A. Harris, 2020, 2019).
Harris argues that contemporary panpsychism, the idea that “all
matter is imbued with consciousness in some sense,” differs significantly
from its earlier versions, now “unencumbered by any religious beliefs …
[and] informed by the sciences and fully aligned with physicalism and
scientific reasoning.” She carefully distinguishes between consciousness
and thought, so that if some primitive consciousness does inhabit all
matter, this does not mean that inanimate objects, like rocks, have ex-
periences or “points of view.” Only certain complex systems, like
humans and other animals, have such (A. Harris, 2020).
Harris has a disarmingly simple solution for panpsychism’s vexing
combination problem. “We run into a combination problem,” she says,
“only when we drag the concept of a ‘self’ or a ‘subject’ into the equa-
tion. The solution to the combination problem is that there is really no
‘combining’ going on at all with respect to consciousness itself.” It all
depends on “the arrangement of the specific matter in question” (A.
Harris, 2020).
As for “the correct resolution to the mystery of consciousness,” Harris
says she personally “is split between a brain-based explanation and a
panpsychic one. So while I’m not convinced that panpsychism offers the
correct answer, I am convinced that it is a valid category of possible
solutions that cannot be easily dismissed.” She prefers, however, a more
neutral term, such as “intrinsic nature theory” or “intrinsic field theory”
(A. Harris, 2020).
13.10. Sheldrake’s self-organizing systems at all levels of complexity
Iconoclastic biologist Rupert Sheldrake’s radical views on the nature
of reality inform theories of consciousness in two ways. One, covered
here, envisions self-organizing systems at all levels of complexity as a
robust form of panpsychism. A second, covered later, is how “morphic
fields” relate to consciousness (17.9) (Sheldrake, n.d.a).
Sheldrake sees no “sharp separation of consciousness in physical
reality; ” rather, “our consciousness and our physical reality go hand in
hand.” He says, “I am certainly not a dualist,” but he does posit “a kind of
mind or consciousness at all levels of nature”—in atoms and molecules,
cells and organisms, plants and animals—and, astonishingly, “in the
earth, in the sun, in the galaxy, and in the whole universe” (Sheldrake,
2007a). Motivated in part by “the recent panpsychist turn in philosophy,
” Sheldrake suggests that “self-organizing systems at all levels of
complexity, including stars and galaxies, might have experience,
awareness, or consciousness” (Sheldrake, 2021).
Sheldrake defines consciousness, idiosyncratically, as “largely about
making choices, considering alternative possibilities.” He states, “Con-
sciousness is about choice. It’s about choosing among possibilities.”
What then does consciousness do?” he asks. “It enables different possi-
bilities to be held together and chosen among”—yielding his non-
mainstream postulate that “any system in nature that has possibilities
that are not fixed would have some measure of consciousness.” A key to
Sheldrake’s consciousness is how “physical reality at any moment opens
up into the future through a range of possibilities … And it’s those future
possibilities which are the realm in which consciousness operates.” All
things that have consciousness are in this same state (Sheldrake, 2007b).
Referencing the indeterminate nature of quantum mechanics, Shel-
drake says, “even a hydrogen atom and an electron has a whole realm of
possibility open to it, of which only a small fraction is realized … [but]
to what extent it’s making real choices, to what extent consciousness
[occurs] in something as simple as an electron, is arguable and probably
undecidable.”
He then makes his even more startling move: “I think it gets much
more interesting when we look at larger systems like the sun or the
galaxy.” Here’s Sheldrake’s argument: “If consciousness emerges from
patterns of electrical activity in our brains, as materialists would assume,
the sun has vastly more complex patterns of electrical activity than our
brains. So why shouldn’t that be associated with consciousness? Why
shouldn’t the sun have a mind? And if the sun has a mind, why not all the
stars? If all the stars have minds, what about huge collections of stars in
galaxies, linked up by vast plasma currents of electricity surging across
trillions of miles of galactic space, with rhythmic patterns connecting all
parts” (Sheldrake, 2007b).
Sheldrake goes ultimate: “Maybe the entire universe has a mind.
Why not? There may be many, many levels of consciousness.” Shel-
drake’s consciousness is a nesting of consciousnesses at all levels of or-
ganization resident in reality. (Actually, Sheldrake would prefer the
term “mind” or “mind-like aspects” than “consciousness,” because from
our perspective these nonbiological “minds” might be considered “un-
consciousness” or “nonconscious.”)
Sheldrake clarifies that these kinds of nonbiological consciousnesses
would be totally different from human consciousness. Just as human
consciousness differs from dog consciousness, he says, “sun conscious-
ness’ differs from “earth consciousness,” and so on. If the sun is
conscious, “it may be concerned with the regulation of its own body and
the entire solar system through its electromagnetic activity, including
solar flares and coronal mass ejections. It may also communicate with
other star systems within the galaxy” (Sheldrake, 2021).
“It’s hard for us to imagine other forms of consciousness,” Sheldrake
stresses. Nonetheless, he suggests, “there’s mind-like organization at all
levels of the universe and in nature,” including a mind-like organization
of the entire universe.”
Sheldrake suggests that “the electrical fields of organized or self-
organizing systems are a good candidate for an interface between con-
sciousness and the physical structure”—whether cells, animals, humans
or stars. Note that in Sheldrake’s system the electrical fields are not the
consciousness per se, which he describes as “matters of possibilities.”
Rather, the electrical fields mediate between physical and consciousness
(as defined).
Sheldrake concludes that all levels or kinds of organization in nature
have their own kind of mind, mediated by electrical fields, and that the
entire universe as a whole also has some kind of consciousness or mind,
which would play an important part in what happens as the universe
evolves (Sheldrake, 2021, n.d.a).
13.11. Wallace’s panpsychism inside physics
To philosopher of physics David Wallace, one way to motivate
panpsychism is as a kind of synthesis of materialism (consciousness is
just reducible to the physical) and dualism (consciousness is separate
from the physical). Each, he says, has major advantages and major
disadvantages. “Materialism seems like it can’t adequately explain
consciousness. Dualism can’t give an adequate causal role to con-
sciousness.” Wallace envisions panpsychism “as a way of getting the best
features of both materialism and dualism without their disadvantages,”
which is why he envisions “panpsychism potentially as the synthesis of
materialism and dualism” (Wallace, 2016a).
Wallace starts with dualism, where “consciousness is real and
fundamental, existing at the bottom-most level of nature”—but dualism,
he stresses, has a serious problem: “How can dualism play a causal role
in physics, because physics looks to be closed and autonomous?” This is
where Wallace has panpsychism playing the critical causal role by
looking to the intrinsic nature of physics. “Physics tells us how fields and
particles relate to each other, but it doesn’t tell us about what they really
are in themselves. According to panpsychism, consciousness is right
there inside the physical world, as its intrinsic nature, and thus when one
field or particle affects another, it’s really consciousness which is doing
the causing. So, you get a causal role for consciousness in physics and
you get consciousness as real and fundamental.” That’s a set of advan-
tages, Wallace argues, “that no other theory has—and it motivates
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
104
panpsychism” (Wallace, 2016a).
Wallace explains that when physics gives a mathematical theory of
how all fundamental physical entities relate to one another quantita-
tively, it doesn’t tell us what these entities actually are. This gives room,
he says, for panpsychism to offer a hypothesis about what these entities
actually are. However, Wallace stresses that the intrinsic relationship
among all these entities, non-conscious and conscious, must be as
described by the laws of physics. There is no need to postulate a fifth
kind of force or feature as the carrier of panpsychic consciousness, he
says; rather, the need is, as Stephen Hawking put it, “What is it that
breathes fire into the equations?” That would be the fundamental nature
of the reality that physics is describing (Wallace, 2016a, 2016b).
Regarding consciousness itself, Wallace would have it not so much as
requiring an extra force or feature in the physical world (as panpsychists
sometimes imply), but rather as the underlying nature of the processes
that physics is describing mathematically.
13.12. Whitehead’s process theory
Although Process Theory is already classified under Materialism
Theories/Relational, motivated by Griffin’s “panexperiential physi-
calism” (9.7.7), I am making the odd decision to classify it also here
under Panpsychism, motivated by process philosopher Matthew Segall’s
bringing Alfred North Whitehead’s Philosophy of Organism “into con-
versation with the recent panpsychist turn in analytic philosophy of
mind.” According to Segall, “Whitehead’s unabashedly metaphysical
project broadly aligns with recent critiques of reductive physicalism and
the turn toward a conception of experience as basic to Nature.” White-
head’s panexperientialism, he says, attempts to take consciousness at
face value, resisting inflationary accounts toward absolute idealism and
deflationary toward eliminative materialism (Segall, 2020).
Segall distinguishes Whitehead’s process-relational panexper-
ientialism from the dominant substance-property variants of panpsy-
chism, arguing that Whitehead’s version avoids many of panpsychism’s
conceptual difficulties. To begin, “Whitehead’s process-relational
rendering doesn’t claim that experience is a ‘primary attribute’ or
‘intrinsic property’ of matter. This is because in Whitehead’s view,
physics has moved beyond the substantialist view of matter, and talk of
essential or accidental properties only made sense given such an
[archaic] ontology … While there was an ‘essential distinction between
[substantial] matter at an instant and the agitations of experience,’ with
this conception of matter having been swept away, a door is opened to
analogies between energetic activity and concrete experience.” Thus,
“Experiences, like energy vectors, are intrinsically process-relational in
that they always involve transition beyond themselves: They manifest in
a ‘specious present’ [Whitehead] as a tension between the actualized
facts of an inherited past and the potential forms of an anticipated
future” (Segall, 2020).
While Segall has “the philosophical payoff of panpsychism” dis-
solving the hard problem of consciousness by “giving experience its
proper place in Nature without undermining the scientific image of the
universe.” Regarding substance-property panpsychism’s combination
problem, Segall says that Whitehead’s process-relational approach
“doesn’t so much solve this problem as it does reframe the problem’s
presuppositions.” Whitehead does this not by “struggling to understand
how abstract little bits of extended matter with mental intrinsic prop-
erties might combine to form bigger bits of minded matter,” but rather
by starting “with a more concrete conception of energetic activity that is
more easily analogized to agitations of experience. Neither ‘matter’ nor
‘mind’ is composed of simply located bits or states.” Thus, “the ongoing
composition of the cosmos is achieved not through the summation of
tiny parts, nor through subtraction from some larger whole (as cos-
mopsychists would have it), but by a dipolar relational process with both
a stability providing material pole and a novelty inducing mental pole.”
According to Segall, “Whitehead is neither a micropsychist nor a
cosmopsychist exclusively. He tries to have it both ways. There is a
universal soul, a psyche of the cosmos, a primordial actuality or God of
this world, and there are countless creatures creating in concert with it.
Creativity transcends both God and finite actualities; it is the source of
all co-evolving parts, wholes, bodies, and souls. Whitehead’s account of
process includes moments of combination and decombination,
conjunction and disjunction. For Whitehead the combination problem
becomes a logic of concrescence [i.e., ‘the production of novel togeth-
erness’], a feature and not a bug, a way of thinking change as more than
just the rearrangement of pre-existing parts or the fragmentation of a
pre-existing whole but as genuine becoming, as an ‘emergent evolution’ or
‘creative advance’ where neither wholes nor parts pre-exist their re-
lations … and in each act of creation the past is not destroyed but re-
incarnated in the novel occasion … Concrescence is thus a cumulative
process and not a merely additive one” (Segall, 2020).
Some call Whitehead’s defense of a panpsychist philosophy the
theory’s most significant development in the 20th century. Whitehead
radically reforms “our conception of the fundamental nature of the
world, placing events (or items that are more event-like than thing-like)
and the ongoing processes of their creation and extinction as the core
feature of the world, rather than the traditional triad of matter, space
and time. His panpsychism arises from the idea that the elementary
events that make up the world (which he called occasions) partake of
mentality in some—often extremely attenuated—sense, metaphorically
expressed in terms of the mentalistic notions of creativity, spontaneity
and perception” (Goff et al., 2022).
This makes Whitehead an emergentist rather than a constitutive
panpsychist. “A given moment of conscious experience is not reducible
to nor simply identical with its constituent parts.” It is “a creative
repetition of the past rather than a combination of parts” (Segall, 2020).
14. Monisms
Monism is the theory that all of reality consists of exactly one con-
crete object or thing, and everything that exists is, in some sense, that
one concrete object or thing (or part of it) (Schaffer, 2018). Because
monisms seek to account for both mental and physical aspects of reality,
avoiding the metaphysical difficulties of dualism and overcoming the
explanatory weakness of materialism, it follows that monisms are also
theories of consciousness. In one way or another, monisms must cover or
contain everything we call mental as well as everything we call physical.
(The existence of various kinds of monisms does not much affect how
monisms are theories of consciousness.)
There is substantial and obvious articulation, or overlap, between
Monism and Panpsychism. Both are motivated by the need to integrate
consciousness into the deep nature of reality; thus, monism theories
have panpsychism features and panpsychism theories can be seen as
monisms (to first approximations). Perhaps it is simply the case of each
reinforcing the other in what are merely different perspectives, histori-
cal and theoretically, on essentially the same stance regarding the
fundamental nature of ultimate reality. However, they are not entirely
the same in that panpsychism has phenomenal or protophenomenal
properties as a part or aspect of some larger, fundamental entity, while
monism has only one fundamental entity that encompasses everything
(although it is not intuitively obvious that this distinction makes much of
a difference). Separate categories for monism and panpsychism are
certainly justified, yet the boundary can be fuzzy.
Some of the theories or ways of thinking that follow are categorized
under Monism because all other categories seem less appropriate,
imposing a belief system that should not apply. (I hope each of these
theories feels less uncomfortable in Monisms.)
14.1. Russellian Monism
Russellian Monism, based on the insights of philosopher Bertrand
Russell, is a view that phenomenal consciousness and the physical world
are deeply intertwined (Alter and Nagasawa, 2012). It characterizes the
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
105
fundamental essence of matter as beyond that which can be accessed by
empirical science or described by mathematical models. The claim is
that the conundrum of consciousness, and how it fits into the physical
world, is so critical that integrating consciousness (or proto-conscious-
ness) into fundamental reality could suggest that the elements inte-
grated are distinct from the ones revealed as a result of integration, thus
shadowing if not revealing hidden, deep, intrinsic features of the phys-
ical world (Goff et al., 2022).
Three core concepts conjoin to generate Russellian monism: (i)
structuralism about physics (describing the world in terms of its spatio-
temporal/relational structure and dynamics); (ii) realism about quiddities
(or inscrutables) (there are quiddities/inscrutables, which underlie but are
not limited by the structure and dynamics physics describes); and (iii)
quidditism (or “inscrutinism”) about consciousness (at least some quiddi-
ties/inscrutables are either phenomenal or protophenomenal properties
and are thereby relevant to the essence of consciousness) (Alter and
Nagasawa, 2012; Alter and Pereboom, 2019).
Daniel Stoljar presents four different accounts of the inscrutables:
“(i) Phenomenal monism: The inscrutables are phenomenal in nature.
(ii) Protophenomenal monism: The inscrutables are not themselves
phenomenal in nature but they are a precursor to phenomenal proper-
ties. (iii) Physical monism: The inscrutables are physical in nature,
though they are outside the domain of physics. (iv) Neutral monism: The
inscrutables are neither phenomenal nor physical but rather have a
nature that is neutral between the two” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023).
To Russellian monists, if the intrinsic nature of fundamental matter is
itself infused by phenomenal properties that express consciousness, then
the model is “Russellian panprotopsychism.” Either way, the claim is
that Russellian Monism bests dualism by avoiding problematic physical-
nonphysical causation and bests materialism by taking consciousness
seriously and grounding it in ultimate reality (Goff et al., 2022).
Philip Goff explains that “Russellian monism comes in both smallest
and priority monist forms. For the smallest, fundamental categorical
properties are instantiated by micro-level physical entities, perhaps
electrons and quarks. For the priority monist, the most fundamental
categorical properties are instantiated by the universe as a whole.” Each
of the categories can be matrixed by whether its properties are “con-
sciousness evolving” or “not consciousness evolving,” yielding four
categories of Russellian monism (Goff, 2019a,b).
14.2. Davidson’s anomalous monism
Anomalous Monism, developed by philosopher Donald Davidson,
holds that mental properties and events must have a physical ontology,
but that psychology cannot be reduced to physics. As such, Anomalous
Monism is a form of property dualism (15.1) and shares features with
Non-reductive Physicalism (10). As Davidson writes, “anomalous
monism holds that mental entities (particular time- and space-bound
objects and events) are physical entities, but that mental concepts are
not reducible by definition or natural law to physical concepts”
(Davidson, 1993).
Anomalous Monism is distinguished from other theories of con-
sciousness by the intersection of three propositional claims: (i) Mental
events have genuine causal powers and cause physical events. (ii) All
causal relationships are backed by natural laws. (iii) There are no nat-
ural laws connecting mental phenomena with physical phenomena.
While each claim has adherents, it is the conjunction of the three claims,
taken together, that gives Anomalous Monism its distinctive look,
because at first glance there surely appears to be inconsistency (if not
contradiction) (Silcox, n.d.).
To appreciate Anomalous Monism’s originality and subtleties, it
needs to be unpacked. A foundational principle is that “psychology
cannot be a science like basic physics, in that it cannot in principle yield
exceptionless laws for predicting or explaining human thoughts and
actions (mental anomalism).” And it is “precisely because there can be
no such strict laws governing mental events that those events must be
identical to physical events” (Yalowitz, 2021).
How to make sense of this? What may seem like a non sequitur is in
fact the heart of the argument. If the physical is the only existent, then
ipso facto the mental (like everything else) must come from the physical
with robust regularities. But how do the mental and physical articulate?
What is this connection?
Here’s the flow of the argument. Given that the mental has causal
powers (claim 1), and that all causal relationships require natural law
(claim 2), because there are no natural (psychophysical) laws that
connect the mental and the physical (claim 3), therefore there is only
one logical way to connect mental events and physical events—now
denied a causal relationship (combining claims 2 and 3): they must be
literally the same thing, the mental and the physical must be in the strong
sense identical.
As identity theories of consciousness are a leitmotif, and a touch-
stone, for comprehending the Landscape, we go deeper. Earlier identity
theories held that “claims concerning the identity of particular mental
and physical events (tokens) depended upon the discovery of lawlike
relations between mental and physical properties (types) … Token-
identity claims thus depended upon type-identity.”
But Anomalous Monism, almost by its founding premise, does not
depend on such psychophysical laws. “Davidson’s position is dramati-
cally different … It in effect justifies the token-identity of mental and
physical events through arguing for the impossibility of type-identities
between mental and physical properties” (Yalowitz, 2021).
Now of course this argument proves that the mental and the physical
are identical only to the extent that the three premises are all accepted as
valid, because the conclusion is embedded (or “hidden”) within the
premises (as are all deductive arguments structured in this way).
Anomalous Monism differs from other theories especially in claiming
that there are no natural laws connecting mental phenomena with
physical phenomena. Other theories assume there are laws or ways to
connect the mental and the physical, or laws or ways where the mental
and the physical are part of, or derived from, the same stuff.
14.3. Velmans’s reflexive monism
Psychologist Max Velmans describes Reflexive monism as “a dual-
aspect theory” (in the tradition of Spinoza) which argues that the one
basic stuff of which the universe is composed has the potential to
manifest both in physical forms and as conscious experience. According
to the theory, in the universe’s “evolution from some primal undiffer-
entiated state,” it differentiates into “distinguishable physical entities, at
least some of which have the potential for conscious experience, such as
human beings” (Velmans, 2008).
Velmans’s “Monism” is straightforward: “the view that the universe,
at the deepest level of analysis, is one thing, or composed of one
fundamental kind of stuff.” His “Reflexive” is more complex: “Each
human participates in a process whereby the universe differentiates into
parts and becomes conscious in manifold ways of itself, making the
entire process reflexive.”
Velmans focuses on “the ontological status and seeming ‘out-there-
ness’ of the phenomenal world and to how the ‘phenomenal world’ re-
lates to the ‘physical world’, the ‘world itself’, and processing in the
brain.” He seeks both to bridge the materialist-dualist gap and to
differentiate Reflexive Monism from “both dualism and variants of
physicalist and functionalist reductionism, focusing on those aspects of
the theory that challenge deeply rooted presuppositions in current
Western thought.” Within Reflexive Monism, he says, “the brain is
simply what the human mind looks like when it is viewed from an
external (third-person) perspective, and neither the observations of
external observers nor those of subjects have a privileged status” (Vel-
mans, 2008).
Central to Velmans’s argument is that in terms of their phenome-
nology, “experiences of the external world are none other than the
physical world-as-experienced, thereby placing aspects of human
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
106
consciousness in the external phenomenal world, rather than exclusively
within the head or brain” (Velmans, 2023). His reflexive model also
makes the strong claim—the radical claim—that, “Insofar as experiences
are anywhere, they are roughly where they seem to be.” For example, “A
pain in the foot is in the experienced foot, and this perceived print on
this visible page really is out here on this visible page. Nor is a pain in the
foot accompanied by some other, additional experience of pain in the
brain, or is this perceived print accompanied by some additional expe-
rience of print in the brain. In terms of phenomenology, this perceived
print, and my experience of this print are one and the same.” Technically,
he says, this is a form of phenomenological externalism (Velmans, 2008).
To understand how experienced objects and events might really be
(roughly) where they are experienced to be, Velmans looks closely at
“the way that phenomenal space relates to ‘real’ space. No one doubts
that physical bodies can have real extension and location in space.” But
we “find it hard to accept that experiences can have a real, as opposed to
a ‘seeming’ location and extension.” We do not doubt, he says, that a
physical foot has a real location and extension in space, but a pain in the
foot can’t really be in the foot, as we are “committed to the view that it is
either nowhere or in the brain.” Although this common understanding
that “location in phenomenal space is not location in real space,” ac-
cording to Reflexive Monism, “this ignores the fact that, in everyday life,
we take the phenomenal world to be the physical world. It also ignores
the pivotal role of phenomenal space in forming our very understanding
of space, and with it, our understanding of location and extension in
measured or ‘real’ space” (Velmans, 2008).
Velmans says that Reflexive Monism provides a different perspective
on the hard problem of consciousness by viewing physical and experi-
ential aspects of mind as arising from a common “psychophysical
ground.” Thus, he argues, of the competing views of consciousness on
offer, Reflexive Monism, being a non-reductionist dual-aspect theory,
“most closely follows the contours of ordinary experience, the findings
of science, and common sense” (Velmans, 2008).
14.4. Strawson’s realistic monism and real materialism
In defining an all-pervading materialism, encompassing all mental as
well as all physical properties and objects, philosopher Galen Strawson
espouses his kind of monism, “Realistic Monism,” as he calls it (Straw-
son, 2009). “I’m attracted to the thing-monist view,” he says, “according
to which the universe is a single thing in some non-trivial sense”
(Strawson, 2020a). His principal thesis is “the primacy of panpsychism”
and he claims “compelling reasons for favoring panpsychism above all
other positive substantive proposals about the fundamental nature of
concrete reality” (Strawson, 2020b).
Strawson deconstructs the concept and use of the term “materi-
alism,” showing that, historically, it had nothing to do with denial of the
existence of consciousness, but rather that consciousness is wholly ma-
terial. He laments that the words “materialism” and “physicalism” have
come to be treated as synonymous and to involve denial of the existence
of consciousness. It is, he says, ironic that these two words have “been
used to name a position in the philosophy of mind that directly rejects
the heart of materialism and is certainly false” (Strawson, 2011).
Strawson asserts that physicalism (or materialism47), that is, “real
physicalism” (or “real materialism”), entails panexperientialism or
panpsychism, on one assumption: it entails panpsychism given the
impossibility of “radical” emergence. Moreover, given that all physical
stuff is energy, in one form or another, we may suppose that “all energy
is an experience-involving phenomenon” (Section: Strawson, 2003,
2009, 2015; 2020a; Strawson and Russell, 2021; Strawson, 2011).
Strawson happily admits, “This sounded crazy to me for a long time,
but I am quite used to it, now that I know that there is no alternative …”
It may also sound odd to use “physical” to characterize mental phe-
nomena like experiential phenomena, but real physicalism, realistic
physicalism, entails panpsychism, and whatever problems are raised by
this fact, he exhorts, are problems a real physicalist must face.
Strawson defines physicalism to be the view that “every real, con-
crete phenomenon in the universe is … physical.” It is a view about the
actual universe, and that he assumes it is true. But then comes the
“Strawsonian Twist.”
What does it take to be a “realistic physicalist” or a “real physicalist?”
He makes one thing absolutely clear. “You’re certainly not a realistic
physicalist, you’re not a real physicalist, if you deny the existence of the
phenomenon whose existence is more certain than the existence of
anything else: experience, ‘consciousness’, conscious experience, ‘phe-
nomenology’, experiential ‘what-it’s-likeness’, feeling, sensation,
explicit conscious thought as we have it and know it at almost every
waking moment.”
All materialists hold that every concrete phenomenon in the universe
is physical, and they are neither sensible nor realistic, Strawson says, if
they have any inclination to deny the concrete reality of mental phe-
nomena like experiential phenomena. He concludes by taking no pris-
oners: “Full recognition of the reality of experience, then, is the
obligatory starting point for any remotely realistic version of physi-
calism … It is the obligatory starting point for any theory that can
legitimately claim to be ‘naturalistic’ because experience is itself the
fundamental given natural fact” (Strawson, 2008).
As a “real physicalist,” in his definition, Strawson holds that the
mental/experiential is physical, and he is happy to say, along with many
other physicalists, that experience is ‘really just neurons firing’, at least
in the case of biological organisms like ourselves. But when he says these
words he means something radically different from what almost all
physicalists mean. He does not mean that all characteristics of what is
going on, in the case of experience, can be described by physics and
neurophysiology (or any non-revolutionary extensions of them). His
claim is stunningly different. It’s that experiential phenomena “just are”
physical, so that there is a lot more to neurons than physics and
neurophysiology account for (or can account for). No one who disagrees
with this, he says, is a “real physicalist.” This is Strawson’s challenge.
Reviewing Strawson’s book subtitled, “Does Physicalism Entail
Panpsychism?”, philosopher Jerry Fodor shares Strawson’s intuition
that the hard problem is “not going to get solved for free” and “views
that we cherish will be damaged in the process.” Fodor concludes, “If
you want an idea of just how hard the hard problem is, and just how
strange things can look when you face its hardness without flinching,
this [Strawson’s book] is the right book to read” (Fodor, 2007).
14.5. Polkinghorne’s dual-aspect monism
To mathematical physicist and Anglican priest John Polkinghorne,
the psychosomatic nature of human persons is best understood in terms
of a “dual-aspect monism,” in which matter and mind are complemen-
tary aspects of a unitary being (Polkinghorne, 2009). He is sure that
we’re not simply matter, that reality is more than just ideas, and that
none of the classical solutions seem to correspond to our experience.
In fact, Polkinghorne argues that classical materialism, idealism and
Cartesian dualism all exhibit a bankruptcy in the face of the many-
layered, and yet interconnected, character of our encounter with reality.
This recognition encourages the search for some form of dual-aspect
monism—similar theories are called “double-aspect theories”—an ac-
count that would acknowledge the fundamental distinction between
experience of the material and experience of the mental but which
would neither impose on reality a sharp division into two unconnected
kinds of substance nor deny the psychosomatic unity of human beings
(Polkinghorne, 2001).
47 Strawson uses “physicalism” and “materialism” interchangeably as onto-
logical descriptors, though at one point preferring “physicalism” because
“matter” is now specially associated with mass-energy while “physical” is more
encompassing. For the uses of “materialism” and “physicalism” in this paper,
see Footnote 12.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
107
Dual-aspect monism is designed to take seriously both our mental
experiences and the material world. It claims that they are related in a
very deep and complementary way in that there is only one stuff in the
world. Dual-aspect monism seeks to avoid devaluing or subordinating
either side. Polkinghorne rejects the charge that dual-aspect monism is a
subtle form of materialism, because, he says, “It doesn’t treat the mental
as being just an epiphenomenon of the material” (Harris, 1998).
To give physical systems the kind of freedom and top-down control
that he desires, Polkinghorne recruits complexity theory, with its dual-
ities of parts/whole and energy/information. The intrinsic un-
predictabilities present in nature, he states, afford the metaphysical
opportunity to consider dissipative systems as exhibiting top–down
causality (Polkinghorne, 2009).
Given that in dual-aspect monism there cannot be a nonphysical soul,
much less an immortal soul, how does Polkinghorne account for the
eschatological requirements of his strong Christian faith, especially the
biblical resurrection of the dead? How might resurrecting the body and
reconstituting the “soul” work?
Speaking on Closer To Truth, Polkinghorne asks, "Can you make
credible understanding of a destiny beyond death for human beings?"
From his theological perspective, he sets two equal and opposite re-
quirements for the afterlife of a soul: continuity, in that the same person
must live after death, and discontinuity, in that the afterlife-person must
live on forever (Section: Polkinghorne, 2007).
“There is not much point in making Abraham, Isaac and Jacob alive
again if they are going to die again,” he says. “So, you must have both
continuity and discontinuity. Now when you think about the continuity
side, what could make those people the same as the ones who lived on
earth before? The traditional answer has been the soul, often understood
in platonic terms—there is some sort of spiritual bit of us liberated at
death that exists and carries on.”
Polkinghorne has none of that. “I think that’s a mistake,” he says.
“We are animated bodies, not animated souls. We’re not apprentice
angels; we are embodied human beings. But if we’ve lost our ‘spiritual
soul’ [as a resource], have we lost our continuity? I don’t think so, but
we have to reconceive the soul.”
Polkinghorne focuses on the carrier of continuity for a person in this
life. “It’s quite difficult,” he says; “here am I, an aging, balding aca-
demic—what makes me the same person as that little boy with the shock
of black hair in the school photograph of many years ago? It’s not
atomic-material continuity: the atoms in my body are totally different
than the atoms in that schoolboy’s body.”
“It cannot be the atoms,” he continues, “but it is the pattern of how
some of those atoms are organized, in some extraordinary, elaborate,
and complex way.” That, Polkinghorne states, is “what I think the
human soul is. The soul is the information-bearing pattern; that’s the
real me” (Polkinghorne, 2007).
Thus, Polkinghorne reconceives the “soul” as an information-bearing
pattern that is encoded by and carried in the body/brain, and which is
dissolved at death along with the dissolution of the body. However, this
unique pattern, this real me, is retained in the divine memory for re-
embodiment at the resurrection of the dead (Polkinghorne, 2003).
During this post-death, pre-resurrection state, this (reconceived) “soul”
has no consciousness and no awareness.
“God will remember the pattern, not lose it,” Polkinghorne says, and
ultimately, God “will reconstitute that pattern in an act of resurrection.”
That’s the continuity side of things. The discontinuity side, Pol-
kinghorne says, “is that I’m not made alive again in order to die again, so
while I’m going to be embodied, I must be embodied in some new form
of matter. And it is perfectly coherent to believe that God can bring into
being such a new form of matter” (Polkinghorne, 2007).
To Richard Swinburne, the idea of afterlife existence germinating
from a renewed instantiation of the pattern of information that we had
when living on Earth is problematic. "The trouble is not merely how
could God, if God so chose, bring into [renewed] existence a being with a
specific pattern of information, but rather that God could [therefore]
bring into existence a few thousand such beings. But because only one of
them could be me, a pattern of information provides no additional cri-
terion for distinguishing which one that would be. And whatever the
extra criterion is, it would have to be such that there [logically] could
only be one instance of it at one time. And if we have such a criterion,
then what need is there for the pattern of information to be the same as a
previous pattern?" (Swinburne, 2016; Kuhn, 2016b).
14.6. Teilhard de Cardin’s evolving consciousness
The Jesuit philosopher/theologian and paleontologist Pierre Teil-
hard de Chardin envisioned the evolution of consciousness as axial in a
grand cosmic system of continuing complexification where conscious-
ness becomes planetized and even “God” is an emergent in a process of
“theogenesis” (Delio, 2020). Teilhard helped coin the concept of a
“noosphere,” describing “the layer of mind, thought and spirit within the
layer of life covering the earth” (Teilhard de Chardin, 1964).
According to theologian (and former neuroscientist) Ilia Delio,
Teilhard has the total material universe "in movement toward a greater
unified convergence” such that “as life systems unite and form more
complex relationships, consciousness rises.” Teilhard, she says, “speaks
of evolution as the rise of consciousness toward a hyper-personalized
organism, what he called an irreversible personalizing universe.” He
speaks of “the human person as a co-creator. God evolves the universe
and brings it to its completion through the human person.” Now the
computer, according to Teilhard, “has evoked a new level of shared
consciousness, a level of cybernetic mind giving rise to a field of global
mind through interconnecting pathways” (foreshadowing the internet)
(Delio, 2021).
Teilhard was a dual-aspect monist. He “considered matter and con-
sciousness not as two substances or two different modes of existence, but
as two aspects of the same cosmic stuff.” Mind and matter “are neither
separate nor is one reducible to the other, and yet neither can function
without the other.” From the Big Bang onward, Delio says, Teilhard has
“a ‘withinness’ and ‘withoutness,’ or what he called radial energy and
tangential energy. Consciousness is, in a sense, the withinness or ‘inside’
of matter, and attraction is the ‘outside’ of matter; hence, the energy of
matter is both attractive (tangential) and transcendent (radial).” The
complementarity of mind and matter is said “to explain both the rise of
biological complexity and the corresponding rise of consciousness.”
Teilhard identifies “the core energy of the universe as love, which both
unifies and transcends by way of consciousness. The greater the exterior
levels of physical complexity, the greater the interior levels of con-
sciousness” (Delio, 2021).
To Teilhard, evolution describes “the dynamic impulse in life toward
more being and consciousness” and that which drives evolution is con-
sciousness. In short, “evolution is the rise of consciousness.” Following
Julian Huxley, he writes that the human person “is nothing else than
evolution become conscious of itself”—and adds, “The consciousness of
each of us is evolution looking at itself and reflecting upon itself”
(Teilhard de Chardin, 1959). The human person is “the point of emer-
gence in nature, at which this deep cosmic evolution culminates and
declares itself” (Delio, 2021).
Moreover, “the presence of mind in matter and the openness of
matter to greater wholeness is the religious phenomenon of nature.”
Radically unorthodox, Teilhard sees this reality as the incarnation of
God, where “God and world are in a process of becoming a new reality
together.” Simply put, Delio says, “we cannot speak of God apart from
human evolution, an idea that led Teilhard to state that God and world
form a complementary pair. God and world are entangled with one
another to the extent that talk of God is impossible apart from talk about
nature and creative change, and talk of nature makes no sense apart
from God” (Delio, 2021).
In summary, Teilhard describes “matter as the matrix of conscious-
ness.” He posits “the law of complexity-consciousness” as a fundamental
principle of evolution, and conversely, “evolution is fundamentally the
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
108
rise of consciousness.” Moreover, the human person is “evolution
become conscious of itself,” with the ultimate goal of “the maximization
of thought” whereby consciousness radiates “throughout the whole, in
every aspect of the cosmos,” and then of “self-reflective consciousness,”
whereby “the human person can stand apart from the world and reflect
on it” (Delio, 2023, pp. 30–32).
Finally, the foundation of Teilhard’s paradigm is “Omega,” which he
sees as the “prime mover of evolution,” the unifying power in evolution.
Omega works its guiding magic from the very beginning of things,
“acting on pre-living cosmic elements,” moving into consciousness as it
emerged as the goal toward which evolution complexifies and con-
verges. “Omega is the absolute whole,” making “wholeness in nature not
only possible but also intensely personal. Teilhard identifies Omega with
God” (Delio, 2023, p. 35).
14.7. Atmanspacher’s dual-aspect monism
Physicist-philosopher Harald Atmanspacher presents mind and
matter, mental and material domains of reality, as manifestations, or
aspects, of one underlying, fundamental reality in which mind and
matter are inseparable. He distinguishes between the epistemic
discernment of both the separate domains and the underlying reality,
and the ontic existence of the “psychophysically neutral domain”
(Atmanspacher, 2020a).
He also distinguishes two classes of dual-aspect theories based on
“the way in which the psychophysically neutral domain is related to the
mental and the physical.” In Russellian monisms, “the compositional
arrangements of psychophysically neutral elements decide how they
differ with respect to mental or physical properties. As a consequence,
the mental and the physical are reducible to the neutral domain”
(Atmanspacher, 2020a).
Whereas in decompositional dual-aspect theories, “the basic meta-
physics of the psychophysically neutral domain is holistic, and the
mental and the physical (neither reducible to one another nor to the
neutral) emerge by breaking the holistic symmetry or, in other words, by
making distinctions. This framework is guided by the analogy to quan-
tum holism …. [which is] based on speculations that clearly exceed the
scope of contemporary quantum theory.”
Atmanspacher establishes connections between the ontic and
epistemic domains of dual-aspect theory and David Bohm’s famous
notions of implicate and explicate order (11.3). “Mental and physical
states emerge by explication, or unfoldment, from an ultimately undi-
vided and psychophysically neutral implicate, enfolded order.” This
order is dynamic, not static, as in Whitehead’s process philosophy
(Atmanspacher, 2020a). Atmanspacher finds dual-aspect potency in the
conjecture by quantum physicist Wolfgang Pauli and analytical psy-
chologist Carl Jung on the concept of synchronicity and draws on
dual-aspect elements from the two disciplines (17.2; Double-aspect
theory, 2023)
In other words, Atmanspacher’s dual-aspect theory hypothesizes that
mental and material manifestations may inherit mutual correlations
because they are jointly caused by the psychophysically neutral level.
Such correlations, he says, would be “remnants reflecting the lost holism
of the underlying reality” (Atmanspacher, 2020a).
Atmanspacher and philosopher of physics Dean Rickles extend the
metaphysical position of dual-aspect monism by aligning “the deep
structure of meaning” as “a fundamental feature of the nature of reality,”
stressing that “the decompositional version of dual-aspect monism
considers the mental and the physical as two aspects of one underlying
undivided reality that is psychophysically neutral.” Crediting their
forerunners (Wolfgang Pauli, Carl Jung, Arthur Eddington, John
Wheeler, David Bohm, and Basil Hiley), the authors “reconstruct the
formal structure of these approaches, and compare their conceptual
emphases as well as their relative strengths and weaknesses.” Their
intent is to establish dual-aspect monism as a scientifically and philo-
sophically robust alternative to physicalism, dualism and idealism
(Atmanspacher and Rickles, 2022).
14.8. Ramachandran’s new physics and neuroscience
Neuroscientist V.S. Ramachandran states that the question of con-
sciousness cannot be answered “in any obvious terms.” Most neurosci-
entists don’t think about the question of consciousness, as it doesn’t
typically arise in neuroscience or in physics. But, he says, the ancient
Vedic texts of India do address the problem of consciousness, the
problem of qualia (Section: Ramachandran, 2019).
“Physics, by definition, is a third-person description of the world; its
laws have no subjective quality at all.” Physics has different wavelengths
of electromagnetic radiation, but “you see colors: where does these come
from? Consciousness emerges only in a first-person description of the
world. I see red; not red is seen by me. I see red!”
“How can physics, including neuroscience, be a complete description
of the world if it excludes my primary sensory experience, if it does not
admit a first-person perspective?” Ramachandran asks. (He considers
neuroscience a branch of physics.) “That I’m looking at the cosmos from
here now has no privileged status in science. For me, I have a privileged
status. How is that possible? That’s the problem.”
“We need a new hybrid discipline, physics and neuroscience, that
includes consciousness,” Ramachandran asserts. “Consciousness is part
of reality, but how it entwines with physical laws needs to be explored”
(Ramachandran, 2019).
14.9. Tegmark’s state of matter
Physicist Max Tegmark speculates that “the subjective experience
that we call consciousness is the way information feels when being
processed in certain complex ways,” and he comes to this strong phys-
icalist view because his starting point is that “It’s all physics.” This
means, he says, “I’m not allowed to have any extra ‘secret sauce’ to add
to the physical world and brain. Thus, explaining consciousness is much
harder for me, but at the same time, it [i.e., the physicalist constraint]
limits or focuses my work to or on very concrete problems” (Tegmark,
2014a).
Clearly, Tegmark says, “there must be some additional principle
about information processing in nature that distinguishes between the
conscious kind and the unconscious kind.” “I would love to find it,” he
continues, “not just because it’s philosophically fascinating, but because
it’s important. Assessing consciousness is a critical need, whether in
caring for comatose patients or in communicating with super-advanced
AI” (Tegmark, 2014a).
Tegmark examines the hypothesis that consciousness can be under-
stood as a “state of matter,” “perceptronium", as he coins it, with
distinctive information-processing abilities (Tegmark, 2015). Assuming
that consciousness is a property of certain physical systems, with no
“secret sauce" or non-physical elements, and given that the key differ-
ence between a solid, a liquid and a gas lies not in the types of atoms, but
in their arrangement, he conjectures that consciousness can be under-
stood as yet another state of matter. Just as there are many types of
liquids, he says, there are many types of consciousness.
To distinguish conscious matter from other physical states of matter,
Tegmark explores four basic principles: “the information, integration,
independence, and dynamics principles.” These principles may identify
conscious entities, account for our three-dimensional world, even
involve the emergence of time. Tegmark’s approach generalizes Giulio
Tononi’s Integrated Information Theory (12) for neural-network-based
consciousness as well as for arbitrary quantum systems.
Founded on his concept that mathematics is the ultimate nature of
reality (Tegmark, 2014b, 2014c, 2014d), Tegmark’s quest is to better
understand the internal reality of our mind and the external reality of
our universe, such that they will hopefully co-explain or at least assist
each other. This view sits somewhat apart from most materialist theories
of consciousness, in which the emergence of consciousness is a
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
109
contingency of evolution.
14.10. Qualia Research Institute’s state-space, qualia formalism, valence
realism
The Qualia Research Institute (QRI), a not-for-profit pursuing unique
approaches to the science of consciousness, stresses “Qualia Formalism,”
the hypothesis that the internal structure of our subjective experience
can be represented precisely by mathematics, and “Valence Realism,”
the central importance of emotion/affect, that is, valence (how good or
bad an experience feels) as a real and well-defined property of conscious
states (Qualia Research Institute). Within the formalism, symmetry is
said to play a significant compositional, functional, and aesthetic role. It
is called the Symmetry Theory of Valence (proposed by philosopher
Michael Edward Johnson): the symmetry of an information geometry of
mind corresponds with how pleasant or unpleasant it is to be (or have)
that experience. (“The biggest mystery hiding in plain sight is what gives
experiences valence.”) (Johnson, 2023).
The key QRI move (or assumption) is that every distinct state of
conscious experience is unique and can be described mathematically;
the number of such states, a “combinatorial explosion of unexpected
phenomena,” is an unimaginably vast (but not infinite) “state-space of
consciousness,” which is an independent, quasi-dimensional aspect of
reality that grows “supergeometrically.” It is the specific geometry of
each state-space of consciousness that is the conscious percept; each
experience would correspond to a single point in the state-space of
consciousness; the set of all possible experiences are organized in such a
way that the similarities between experiences are encoded in the ge-
ometry of the state-space; and the degrees of symmetry or lack of sym-
metry of the geometry reflect the balance of positive and negative
valence, both reflecting brain harmonics which somehow interact with
the quasi-dimensional state-space and its symmetries (Shinozuka,
2020). (The “state-space of consciousness” resonates with a similar kind
of structure in Integrated Information Theory, 12.)
QRI says its position is close to dual-aspect monism or neutral
monism. It is committed to an extended physicalism in the sense that
extended laws of physics ultimately must describe fields of qualia.
Included is the idea that emotional valence (the pleasantness/unpleas-
antness of an experience) is a natural kind, a real division of the world
carved at its joints, which is said to provide substantial information
about phenomenology (Qualia Research Institute, n.d.).
QRI rejects functionalism as creating confusion but considers exotic
states of consciousness as important data points for reverse-engineering
the underlying formalism for consciousness. As noted, QRI is most
compatible with, but not synonymous with, Integrated Information
Theory (12), which QRI calls the first mainstream theory of conscious-
ness to satisfy a Qualia Formalist account of experience. QRI leverages
the idea from Integrated Information Theory that for every conscious
experience, there is a corresponding mathematical object such that the
mathematical features of that object are isomorphic to the properties of
the experience, and that without this idea, no matter the neurobiological
theory, we cannot solve the hard problem of consciousness (Qualia
Research Institute, n.d.).
14.11. Bentley Hart’s monism: consciousness, being, God
Philosopher, theological scholar, and intellectual provocateur, David
Bentley Hart, constructs an ultimate unified monism, first by showing
that consciousness/mind and being/existence are profoundly insever-
able. He argues that “rational thought and coherent order are two sides
of a single reality,” and that only by embracing God “as the absolute
unity of consciousness and being,” can the one ontological reality be
confirmed (Hart, 2022b). In a sense, it is a higher-order monism.
Oversimplified, an idealist form of panpsychism (Hart, 2021a).
Hart is not a timorous monist: “At the end of the day, I’m a monist as
any sane person is … any metaphysics that is coherent is ultimately
reducible to a monism” (Hart, 2024).
Unsurprisingly, Hart is a fierce critic of materialism (Hart, 2019a):
“The incommensurability between physical causation and mental events
is so vast that one can confidently assume that no purely physical
explanation of their relation will ever succeed” (Hart, 2021a). He argues
that it would be very odd to claim that physiology and mental agency
can be characterized within the same “mereological hierarchy.” Far
from being inverse descriptions of one and the same causal structure, he
says, “the causal description peculiar to each sphere—the material and
the mental—is not even vaguely similar to that peculiar to the other. If
the mental merely supervened physically upon the material, in the way
the shape of the wheel supervenes upon the wheel’s iron molecules, it is
impossible coherently to conceive of that miraculous conjugation as
merely a structural extension of inherent physical propensities. Here
each level operates in ways radically disparate from—even contrary
to—the ways in which the other operates. Material structures and forces,
if the reductionist picture of nature is correct, are composite, frag-
mentable, non-purposive, non-intentional, and essentially third-person;
mental agency, by contrast, is indivisibly unified, physically infrangible,
thoroughly teleological, inherently intentional, and irreducibly first--
person (that is, conscious)” (Hart, 2019a, 2022a, 2022d).
Hart is certain that “nothing like an actual science of mental reality
will ever be conceivable (much less practicable) so long as the culture of
the sciences clings to a belief in the principle of the ‘causal closure of the
physical’” (Hart, 2021b). He rejects irreducible emergence as “logical
nonsense; whatever properties appear in an effect, unless imposed
adventitiously, are already implicit in its ‘lower’ causes, even if only as a
kind of virtual intentionality.” He avers that “‘Strong emergence’ is
either a myth, a category error, or a truth so bizarre as to suggest that
truth as such is impenetrable to reason; to invoke such a principle is to
say nothing” (Hart, 2022a). He recommends reconsidering “something
like causal language proposed in Aristotelian tradition” (Hart, 2022b).
Hart’s intuition is that “The conditions necessary for knowledge of
the world and the conditions necessary for the world’s existence as an
object of knowledge at any number of vital points seem insensibly to
merge into a single reality, a single act,” a simplicity and an ultimacy, he
says, that cannot be found within nature as a closed totality and cannot
be consistent with any physicalist theory of the world. It becomes
impossible not to wonder, he continues, “whether the only properly
empirical approach to the question of mental reality should begin with a
radically different kind of methodological bracketing: one that suspends
every presupposition regarding a real distinction between epistemology
and ontology.”
He continues, “At least, we should never refuse to reflect upon the
ancient metaphysical quandary of whether being and consciousness are
ever truly severable from one another.” To exist fully, he says, is “to be
manifest to consciousness,” and “there is no such thing as ontological
coherence that is not a rational coherence,” such that the irreducibility
of mind to physical causes and the irreducibility of being to physical
events are one and the same irreducibility. There is a point then, Hart
argues, “at which being and intelligibility become conceptually indis-
tinguishable” and “being in itself is pure intelligibility” (Hart, 2022b).
Given that “world and mind really are open to one another,” Hart
accords “a certain causal priority to mind over matter in our picture of
reality” in that materialism would have more difficulty to account for
consciousness than consciousness would for matter.
Hart invokes Bernard Lonergan’s argument that the “unrestricted
intelligibility” of reality leads to God as the one “unrestricted act of
understanding.” The ascent towards ever greater knowledge is, Hart
says, “an ascent towards an ultimate encounter with limitless con-
sciousness, limitless reason, a transcendent reality where being and
knowledge are always already one and the same, and so inalienable from
one another” (Hart, 2022b).
“A restricted instance of that unrestricted act,” Hart says, is his “best
definition of mind.” He then goes to God, reasoning that “every act of
conscious, unified, intentional mind is necessarily dependent upon
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
110
infinite mind—which is to say, God.” God, then, is “the logical order of
all reality, the ground both of the subjective rationality of mind and the
objective rationality of being …. the one ontological reality of reason as
it exists both in thought and in the structure of the universe” (Hart,
2019b, 2022b).
The final step in forming Hart’s ultimate monism will seem strange to
most, blasphemous to some: taking consciousness and being, already
one and the same, and unifying it with God, to become, all together, the
ultimate one and the same. This is not pantheism (or panentheism), but
based on Hart’s Orthodox Christian convictions, a Christological
monism. He quotes Maximus the Confessor, who says, “in the union with
God, we ultimately are destined to become uncreated.” In Hart’s ulti-
mate monism, “God doesn’t become God, but God in those who are
becoming God” (Hart, 2022c).
14.12. Leslie’s consciousness inside an infinite mind
Philosopher John Leslie suggests that ethical requirements, when not
overruled by stronger ethical requirements, are creatively effective. The
cosmos they create is a collection of infinitely many minds, each infinite
mind eternally conscious of all that’s worth contemplating. Our universe
is a structure inside one such mind, its reality consisting simply in its
being contemplated. (Infinitely many finer universes might join our
universe in that mind’s consciousness, but it does at least deserve its
place there.) (Leslie, 2001).
How, though, would one’s own consciousness fit into this scenario?
Well, each infinite mind is “a single existent” in this sense, that its in-
gredients stand to it somewhat as a ruby’s shape and its redness stand to
the ruby; they couldn’t exist independently, any more than could the
particles in the Bose-Einstein condensates described by quantum phys-
ics. But despite how all the parts of each universe which any such mind
contemplated would exist—remember, solely through entering into that
mind’s contemplations—some of those parts could each have con-
sciousness of its own. They could be conscious brains, or conscious
computers. Being inside the existential unity of that mind wouldn’t
make these know that it was there that they existed, or what other things
existed there. Conscious, when it contemplated us, of every quark and
electron of your brain and mine, that mind could leave us in ignorance
even of each other’s existence (Leslie, 2001).
Similarly, our lives from birth to death could be eternally present to
that mind’s awareness whereas we could only guess what would fill our
next few hours. Still, one’s consciousness might itself be existentially
unified at any given moment, perhaps thanks to quantum-physical
processes. This could explain how the entirety of a painting, for instance,
can be known in a single glance. Brains without regions that featured
quantum computations, computers which weren’t quantum computers,
might be incapable of such knowledge.
Leslie concludes, “Innumerable further things worth contemplating
would exist inside each infinite mind, many of them quite unlike our
universe and its living beings. Examples could be utterly lifeless uni-
verses; universes very unlike ours in their physical laws, or obeying no
laws at all; countless things of interest or of beauty, each not forming
part of any universe” (Leslie, 2001).
15. Dualisms
Dualism is the theory of consciousness that requires two radically
distinct parts: a physical brain, obviously, but also in addition, a sepa-
rate, nonphysical substance that is not only independent of the brain but
also not of the physical world (as presently conceived). This would mean
that reality consists of (at least) two ontological categories—physical
and nonphysical, whether substances, properties, aspects, dimensions or
planes of existence. Dualism is often called “substance dualism,” to
distinguish it from “property dualism,” which is ontologically different
(15.1). In general usage, “dualism” means substance dualism.
For dualism to be true, what follows must be that the physical world,
at its most fundamental level of fields and forces, is not in some way
causally closed, and that mental properties play a causal role in affecting
the physical world. This perspective, often called interactionism, provides
that physical states cause phenomenal states, and phenomenal states
cause physical states, and whatever psychophysical laws there may be
will operate in both directions (Chalmers, 2003; 15.8).
Common forms of dualism identify the essence of the person with a
nonphysical “soul,” generally an immortal soul. This kind of “soul-
centered dualism” is also the theory of consciousness most widely
believed by the vast majority of the world’s population, largely
implicitly via acculturation to belief systems, whether organized reli-
gion or folk traditions. Dualism (substance dualism), certainly, is the
default doctrine in the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam.
Dualism is largely rejected by philosophers, at least by most pro-
fessional philosophers in the West48 (PhilPapers Survey, 2009, 2020).
Dualism has fallen out of philosophical favor for at least four reasons. (i)
No Interactions: given the scientific understanding that the physical
world is a causally closed system in that every event has a prior, phys-
ically efficient cause, how could anything outside such a closed system
affect it? (Goff, 2020). (ii) Not Parsimonious: two kinds of world stuffs
seem excessively complex; Occam’s razor cuts unnecessary entities in
explanations. (iii) No Knowledge: souls are slippery; how to know
anything about how they work? (iv) Fading Divine Creator: With God
less prominent in academia, there seems one less way to create or
allocate souls.
In trying to characterize souls (assuming for a moment that souls do
exist), we ask questions. Are all souls exactly the same, as all electrons in
the electron quantum field are the same? Are souls undifferentiated
(everyone gets the same “starter kit”), or specially tailored to each in-
dividual? Are souls created by God? Or are souls the inevitable, auto-
matic product of a set of deep psychophysical laws; in other words, given
specific, complex structures of atoms, do souls pop into existence? Or are
souls always existing, part of a cosmic consciousness—journeying,
reincarnating, transitioning, transforming, reincarnating ….?
Notably, because consciousness, under dualism, would require both
a non-physical substance and a physical brain (somehow working
together), it is conceivable, following the death of the body and the
dissolution of the brain, that this nonphysical substance by itself could
maintain some kind of existence, conscious or otherwise. (Although this
nonphysical substance is traditionally called a “soul”—a term laden with
theological burdens—a soul is not the only kind of thing, or form, that
such a nonphysical substance could be.)
Philosopher Dean Zimmerman reviews “a spectrum of dualisms,”
resulting from different meanings of “nonphysical”. Are souls simple,
with no parts, or composite, with internal components (whether fixed or
flexible)? To pose an extreme, could souls be abstract objects, outside of
space and time, necessary existents? Most dualists would have souls as
concrete, nonphysical objects. Some would even have souls extended in
space, sharing the same special coordinate system as bodies (Zimmer-
man, 2005).
David Bentley Hart welcomes confrontation by claiming that most
early modern scientists were better able to understand the mind-body
problem than are many in the sciences today. The 17th century solution
to the seeming irreconcilability of mind and matter was “to adopt a
casual and contented dualism, allowing the mental and the physical
each its own discrete autonomous sphere: nature, not being teleological
or intentional in any way, is nothing like mind; mind, not being
48 The first PhilPapers Survey of philosophy faculty and PhDs, conducted in
2009, reported: Accept or lean toward: Physicalism, 56.5%; Non-physicalism,
25.9%; Other, 16.4%. (Bourget and Chalmers, 2009; PhilPapers Survey, 2009).
The latest Survey in 2020 showed a modest but meaningful shift away from
Physicalism (51.93%) and toward Non-physicalism (32.08%); Other, about the
same (16.56%) (Bourget and Chalmers, 2023; PhilPapers Survey, 2020).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
111
composite, purposeless, and impersonal, is nothing like nature.” The two
can somehow interact, probably, Hart suggests, through the sheer power
of God, but “neither is reducible or even qualitatively similar to the
other.” Hart recognizes the inherent problems in describing “any kind of
coherent ontological, causal, or epistemological continuity between the
two spheres”—Hart himself is a monist (14.11)—“it [dualism] was no-
where near so magnificent a disaster as the later, materialistically
monistic attempts to reduce mental events to mechanical [processes]
have so far proved” (Hart, 2019a, 2021a).
To Galen Strawson, “Dualists who postulate two distinct substances
while holding that they interact causally not only face the old and
seemingly insuperable problem of how to give an honest account of this
interaction. They also face the (even more difficult) problem of justi-
fying the claim that there are two substances.” To think that dualism has
anything in its favor, Strawson asserts, “is simply to reveal that one
thinks one knows more about the nature of things than one does—and it
has Occam’s razor (that blunt, sharp instrument) against it” (Strawson,
2008). The dualism theories that follow in this section challenge this
denial.
Jaron Lanier says, “You’ve got two choices. Either you know
everything [about consciousness], or you organize your ignorance in
some intelligent and organized manner. Dualism is the most honest
manner of organizing your ignorance, okay?” (Lanier, 2007b).
As noted, Closer To Truth viewers regularly send me diverse theories
related to consciousness, some just ideas, some elaborate systems, and
occasionally they are hard to classify. For example, a consciousness
system operating independently of the central nervous system, consti-
tuted by “a Material B” (exhibiting “coupling properties” beyond the
boundaries of physics) and explored by “memory-related thought pro-
cesses” and “illogical nonlinear-thinking”49 (Ma et al., 2023).
It is well known that mental causation is a vexing problem for du-
alists. By what conceivable mechanism could nonphysical stuff effect
physical stuff? This is not a primary issue for this Landscape (15.8), but it
is for Dualism.
Again, the purpose of this section on Dualisms as a theory of con-
sciousness is to describe various kinds of dualism, not to argue in favor
or against (a self-imposed hurdle on which I occasionally trip).
15.1. Property dualism
Property Dualism is the idea that while there is only one kind of
substance in the world, physical substance, there are two kinds of
properties, mental and physical properties, such that mental properties
cannot be reduced to or explained by physical properties alone, even
though both kinds of properties are generated by the same physical
thing, namely brains. More specifically, property dualism maintains that
human persons are entirely physical objects, composed wholly by the
constituents of fundamental physics and subject only to the laws of
physics, but also they have, at the same time and equally inherent, non-
physical properties or aspects, namely mental properties or aspects
(thoughts, concepts, ideas) that are not reducible to, and not explainable
by, the properties of fundamental physics (and its special science
derivatives)—even though all of property dualism’s properties must
come from those constituents of fundamental physics. Simply, human
persons would have nonphysical properties but no nonphysical parts.
According to Dean Zimmerman (following Chalmers), property
dualism means that, “For at least some mental states, it is not possible to
define, in terms of microphysical properties alone, a physical property
common to all individuals in that mental state, and only to them.”
Property dualism, then, would be the failure of supervenience, which
states that “among all the possible individuals in all the possible worlds,
there is no pair with all the same microphysical properties but different
mental properties” (Zimmerman, 2005).
Zimmerman applies property dualism to two famous questions in
philosophy of mind: “It seems easy to imagine physically indiscernible
zombies (animate human bodies with no consciousness) or people
whose spectrum of color experiences is the reverse of one’s own. If
genuinely possible, these scenarios show that the mental does not su-
pervene upon the physical” (Zimmerman, 2005).
But in a wholly physical world, how could the mental not supervene
upon the physical? How could different mental states arise from pre-
cisely the same microphysical states (down to the most fundamental
physics)? If mental states can so arise, mustn’t something be missing, or
arbitrary, in the physical world? If mental states cannot so arise, what
then of property dualism?
To oversimplify, property dualism is dualistic only in its deep epis-
temology, not in its deep ontology, which remains entirely materi-
alistic—consciousness remains wholly the product of brain function.
Under property dualism, the mind still comes entirely from the brain,
without residue. When super-advanced neuroscience accounts for all
that can be known about the brain—though obviously it would be
fiendishly complex—will there be nothing left over to explain about the
mind?
Yet, property dualism has some mental properties as irreducible, a
move that perhaps help blunt attacks on materialist theories of con-
sciousness. (Property dualism shares features with Non-Reductive
Physicalism, 10.) But what does this really mean? How irreducible?
Irreducible in practice, for sure. But irreducible in principle? What
would an absolute complete science, from fundamental physics to
neuroscience, not capture?
Philosopher Ralph Weir evaluates the common preference in phi-
losophy of mind for varieties of property dualism over other alternatives
to physicalism and certainly over substance dualism. He argues that the
standard motivations for property dualism “lead directly to nonphysical
substances resembling the soul of traditional metaphysics.” Using the
conceivability of modal arguments for zombies and ghosts and
critiquing Russellian monist forms of property dualism, he concludes
that “if you posit nonphysical properties in response to the mind-body
problem, then you should be prepared to posit nonphysical substances as
well” (Weir, 2023).
Property dualism is the first subcategory under dualism because it is
the most materialistic, the least dualistic, of the bunch. While I appre-
ciate its important role in the development of philosophy of mind, I must
admit that I’ve never had it near top-of-list in the marketplace of
fundamental theories.
Peter van Inwagen muses that “‘property dualism’ is a very odd name
to give it.” His argument clarifies the essence of dualism itself. “If there
are non-physical substances, then physical and non-physical substances
(a cat and an angel, for example) are clean different kinds of thing.
Although they are both substances right enough, the division of the
category ‘substance’ into the sub-categories ‘physical’ and ‘non-phys-
ical’ is an ontologically significant division. We call Descartes and Plato
dualists because they think there are substances in both sub-categories. I
would suppose that ‘property dualists’ call themselves dualists because
they think that the division of properties into physical and non-physical
properties is an ontologically significant division of the category
‘property’, a division as significant as the physical/non-physical division
of the category ‘substance’. If this is so, I think that the self-chosen
description ‘property dualist’ indicates a metaphysical confusion in the
way property dualists conceive of properties” (Van Inwagen, 2007b).
Nonetheless, unlike much-disparaged substance dualism, property
dualism remains a respectable position within philosophy of mind
(Zimmerman, 2005).
15.2. Historical and traditional dualisms
Dualism is the oldest and most ubiquitous theory of consciousness in
the sense that nonphysical aspects of the world and mind, such as
49 The three Chinese scientists are, inclusively, from Mainland China, Taiwan,
and the USA. It is good that consciousness can catalyze harmony.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
112
animism and ancestor worship, had long seemed the default assumption
of millennia of pre-modern human groups and cultures. Plato’s
description of immortal souls in ancient Greece, where the person was
entirely immaterial, and the profound ruminations about consciousness
in ancient India, debating individual and cosmic varieties, were
consistent with common intuitions and thus readily accepted.
On the other hand, biblical accounts of the nature of the person,
especially in the Hebrew scriptures, stress human physicality and mor-
tality, with no obvious assertions about immortal souls (Van Inwagen,
1995). In Genesis, humans became (were not inherently) “a living soul”
(Gen. 2:7). Ezekiel writes, “The soul that sinneth, it shall die” (Ezek.
18:20). Paul, in the New Testament, has “the wages of sin is death”
(Rom. 6:23). Granted, theologians can interpret “death,” as, say, a soul
that is separated from God. But the Psalmist is clear, saying of humans,
“His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his
thoughts perish” (Ps. 146:4). And Solomon is unambiguous, “the dead
know nothing” (Eccles. 9:5).
Nonetheless, the overwhelming majority of adherents to the Abra-
hamic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, along with most of
their religious teachers, assume that human beings are, in essence, a soul
and that the soul has some kind of future beyond death.
John Leslie describes the historical understanding of souls as “exis-
tentially unified,” noting, "When the parts of a soul were viewed as
existentially unified at each particular instant, it wasn’t thought that
God, when manufacturing unified souls, had to do some kind of special
mixing involving many separate steps. It was believed simply that souls
had, from the moment of their creation by God, the property of being
complex yet existentially unified. Many distinguishable elements of such
complexity were present when a soul had a thought or an experience,
but still, a soul remained existentially unified at each instant and
remained the very same soul at successive instants" (Leslie, 2006).
15.3. Swinburne’s substance dualism
Christian philosopher Richard Swinburne is a leading advocate of
substance dualism (Swinburne, 2013). "If you want to tell the whole
story of the world, you must say what objects there are in the world,
what substances there are, and what properties they have at different
times," Swinburne said on Closer to Truth. "Of course, that will include all
the physical objects, all the tables and chairs and planets and atoms. But,
of course, that won’t tell the whole story. You will also have to tell the
story of conscious life, which is associated with each body." Swinburne
asserts that in order to tell "the whole story of the world," one must "pick
out subjects of experience—not just by the experiences they have, not
just by the physical bodies with which they are associated" but also with
"separate mental entities for which the natural word is ’soul’ … If you
can’t bring ’soul’ into the account of the world, you will not tell the
whole story of the world, because you will not tell who has which
conscious life" (Swinburne, 2007; Swinburne, 2006).
"If the only things were physical objects, including bodies and brains,
we would not be able to distinguish a case where you have the body
which is presently yours and I have the body which is presently mine,
from the case where you have the body which is presently mine and I
have the body which is presently yours," he adds. "If physical properties
and mental properties were just properties of bodies there would be no
difference between these cases; " but because there are obvious differ-
ences between "you" and "me," Swinburne claims that "there must be
another essential part of me which goes where I go, and this we can call
my ’soul.’" Truths about persons, Swinburne stresses, are not truths
about brains or bodies (Swinburne, 2007).
Swinburne’s argument for the existence of a soul—that "souls
constitute personal identity and the continued existence of me will
consist in the continued existence of my soul"—"is quite apart from what
might happen in the world to come." Moreover, Swinburne’s arguments
for the reality of a nonphysical soul do not depend, he says, on theo-
logical revelation or his own religious convictions (Swinburne, 2016;
Kuhn 2016b).
15.4. Composite dualism
Modern dualism in philosophy of mind begins with Descartes who
famously divides the world between the physical and the mental. He was
motivated by the obvious distinction that the mind has thought but no
extension while the body has extension but no thought. Yet body and
mind both seem needed to have a human person.
Composite dualists require both body and mind to constitute a per-
son, where “body” generally denotates brain and “mind” generally
denotates soul. There are of course variations and problems (Zimmer-
man, 2005). A key question is whether the nonphysical part, the soul,
has mental states independent from the body/brain? To most dualists,
both historical and contemporary, the soul does indeed.
As to the relationship between the body and the soul, Swinburne is
ambivalent. "Maybe, of course, a soul can’t function on its own," he said.
"Maybe it can only function when associated with a body. In that case,
my continued existence would consist in it being joined to a body again,
perhaps an entirely new body. I think a soul could exist on its own, but
not a great deal turns on that." A body is required, Swinburne said,
because "for us to interact with others, to recognize others, we need
different public characteristics” (Swinburne, 2016; Kuhn 2016b).
I asked Swinburne to speculate on the essence or composition of such
a soul. Is it a differentiated substance? What’s to prevent your soul from
getting mixed up with my soul?
"The difference between souls is ultimate, unanalyzable by anything
else," Swinburne responded. "A soul has no extension. It is an ’imma-
terial particular’, to use an old-fashioned philosophical term. It does, of
course, have characteristics, properties. It has thoughts, feelings, atti-
tudes, and so on. But the way we distinguish in practice between souls is
in terms of the bodies with which they are associated because the dif-
ference between your soul and my soul, being ultimate, does not consist
in their relations to our respective bodies. There is of course nothing
paradoxical about the difference between souls being unanalyzable,
because some differences must be ultimate; if you can analyze ’a’ by ’b’
and ’b’ by ’c’ and so on, you eventually get to things which you can’t
analyze, and the differences between human souls in my view are one of
those things. This is why the only way souls can have a public presence is
through their attachment to bodies” (Swinburne, 2007, 2016).
15.5. Stump’s Thomistic dualism
The influential Christian scholastic philosopher St. Thomas Aquinas
gives an account of the soul that is non-Cartesian in character, according
to Catholic philosopher Eleonore Stump, who has Aquinas taking the
soul to be something essentially immaterial or configurational but
nonetheless realized in material components. This suggests, she argues,
not only that Cartesian dualism isn’t essential to Christianity but also
that the battle lines between dualism and materialism are misdrawn
(Stump, 1995).
Stump recognizes that because Cartesian dualism is widely regarded
(among philosophers) as false, and because “it is also the case that the
major monotheisms have traditionally been committed to dualism of a
Cartesian sort, then in the view of many philosophers the apparent or
putative falsity of Cartesian dualism becomes an embarrassment for
those religions.”
In building his alternative to a Cartesian sort of dualism (in historical
context, to Plato’s account of the soul), Aquinas is guided by “two
complex, culturally conditioned sets of intuitions,” each of which relates
to a biblical passage. The first is "dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return" (Gen. 3:19), conveying that a human being is a material object,
“made out of the same sort of constituents as the earth is,” and the
second is "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it" (Eccles.12:7), conveying that a human
person survives death, “because her spirit or soul continues to exist after
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
113
the dissolution of her body.” Stump has Aquinas accommodating both
sets of intuitions with his account of the human soul (Stump, 1995).
Famously, Aquinas takes the soul to be the form of the body, but, as
Stump points out, “the soul not only is the form that makes this matter a
living human body but also is the form that makes the matter this human
being.” And when, after death, all that is left of a human being is the
soul, “individuality persists on Aquinas’s account.”
“Soul” is a larger category for Aquinas, his generic term for the
substantial forms of all material objects that are living. Plants have souls,
not in the human sense, but in that they enable “a configuration of
matter which allows for nutrition, growth, reproduction.” Animals, too,
have souls, since they, too, are living things; but the configuration of
their matter also allows them perception. The forms that constitute
human beings allow a more distinctive set of capacities, namely, intel-
lective processes. Aquinas tends to call the human soul “the intellective
soul” or “the rational soul”.
Aquinas’s soul is created directly by God and infused into matter.
The soul is the act of the body, “because it is in virtue of the soul that
something is actually a living human body.” Moreover, because the soul
is the form of the body, it has a spatial location; while the body is alive,
the soul is located where the body is.
As for the post-mortem, disembodied soul, while it does persist, it is
not the complete human being who was the composite but only a part of
that human being. A separated soul does exist on its own after death, but
it nonetheless isn’t a substance in its own right. Disembodied existence
isn’t natural to the soul.
Stump sums up: “The soul is an essentially configurational state
which is immaterial and subsistent, able to exist on its own apart from
the body. On the other hand, the soul is the form that makes the living
human body what it is. While it is possible with divine help for the soul
to exist and exercise cognitive function on its own, apart from the body,
that state is unnatural to it. In the natural condition, human cognitive
functions are to be attributed to the whole composite and not to the soul
alone, although the composite exercises cognitive functions by means of
the soul.” In Stump’s view, the real lesson of Aquinas’s account of the
soul is to show that the dichotomy between materialism and dualism is
misleading (Stump, 1995).
15.6. Feser’s neo-Thomistic, neo-Aristotelian, common-sense dualism
Catholic philosopher Edward Feser’s account of consciousness
combines a neo-Thomistic view that some mental faculties are imma-
terial and a neo-Aristotelian view that we perceive the world actually as
it appears to be (i.e., direct realism, such that color and sound are
properties of external objects as real as size and shape) (Section: Feser,
2012a; 2012b; 2012c; 2022a; 2022b).
As Feser explains, Aristotelians and Thomists use the term “intellect”
as that faculty by which we grasp abstract concepts, make judgments
and reason logically. Intellect is to be distinguished from “imagination,”
the faculty by which we form mental images (visual, auditory, etc.), and
from sensation, the faculty by which we perceive the external material
world and the internal world of the body. Feser argues that the irre-
ducibility of intellect to imagination and sensation is undeniable (e.g.,
the intellect’s concepts are universals while mental images and sensa-
tions are particulars). He also argues that “the reason why intellectual
activity cannot in principle be reduced to sensation or imagination is, as
it happens, related to the reason why intellectual activity cannot in
principle be reduced to, or entirely supervenient upon, or in any other
way explicable in terms of material processes of any sort” (Feser,
2012a).
To explain intellectual activity entirely in terms of material pro-
cesses, Feser says, is to inevitably deny the existence of some essential
aspect of the intellectual activity. If you identify thought with material
processes, you are necessarily committed to denying, implicitly or
explicitly, that our thoughts really ever have any determinate or un-
ambiguous content. According to Feser, some materialists have seen
this, including Quine and Dennett, and decided “to bite the bullet and
accept that the content of all thought and language is inherently
indeterminate.”
Feser asserts that such claims are indefensible because it would
contradict making sense of mathematics and logic, and hence of
empirical science, all of which presupposes that we have determinate
concepts. “Anyone who thinks that thought can even in principle be
entirely material,” he says, “hasn’t thought carefully enough about the
nature of thought” (Feser, 2012a).
But Feser’s dualism is not Descartes’s dualism, which makes as-
sumptions about the nature of matter as much as or more than as-
sumptions about the nature of mind, and thus is responsible, in part, for
generating the mind-body problem. The key point, Feser says, is that by
characterizing matter in purely quantitative, mathematical terms, Des-
cartes left no place in it for qualitative features like color, odor, taste,
sound, smell, heat and cold as common sense understands them.
Accordingly, he treated these qualitative features—as Galileo before
him and countless others after him did—as entirely mind-dependent,
existing only in our conscious experience of the world but not in the
world itself (Feser, 2012b).
This means that if these qualitative features as common sense un-
derstands them exist only in the mind and not in the material world, it
follows that these features cannot themselves be material. A kind of
dualism follows, Feser claims, precisely from the materialist conception
of matter. The so-called “qualia problem” that contemporary philoso-
phers of mind fret over, he argues, “is the inevitable result of the
conception of matter to which modern scientists in their philosophical
moments have wedded themselves” (Feser, 2012b).
In Feser’s reading, Descartes and other moderns had an austere
concept of nature as inherently devoid of the qualitative features we
know from conscious experience (e.g., color, sound, heat, cold) as well
as of meaning or purpose of any kind. Thus, they conceived of the human
mind as an immaterial substance that somehow interacts with those
parts of the natural world we call human bodies and brains. This spawns
Descartes’s novel form of dualism, which is notoriously problematic (i.
e., the interaction problem) such that modern materialists throw out
Descartes’s immaterial substance while holding on to his view of the
material world. (But their own position, Feser adds, is even more
problematic, since it leaves them with no place at all to locate qualitative
features or meaning.) (Feser, 2012c).
Moreover, because Descartes took the human body as just one
entirely mathematically definable bit of the material world among
others, entirely devoid of qualitative features, and took all consciousness
to reside in the res cogitans, which he regarded as immaterial, Descartes’s
position implies that sensation and imagination are immaterial. Hence if
sensation and imagination turn out to be material after all, it is under-
standable how some would infer that all operations of the res cogitans, all
mental activity, might be susceptible to materialist explanation as well
(Feser, 2012b).
But, Feser argues, the Aristotelian tradition has always regarded
sensation and imagination as corporeal faculties, and as having nothing
essentially to do with the reasons why our distinctively intellectual ac-
tivities are incorporeal, in that strictly intellectual activity on the one
hand and sensation and imagination on the other, differ in kind, not
merely in degree, so that to establish the corporeal nature of the latter is
irrelevant to the question of whether the former is corporeal.
Aristotle and the Scholastic tradition that built on his thought took
the common-sense view that the natural world is filled with irreducibly
different kinds of objects and qualities: people; dogs and cats; trees and
flowers; rocks, dirt, and water; colors, odors, sounds; heat and cold;
meanings and purposes (Feser, 2012c). The founders of modern phi-
losophy and science overthrew Aristotelianism, and, on Feser’s view,
common sense along with it. On the new view of nature inaugurated by
Galileo and Descartes, the material world is comprised of nothing more
than colorless, odorless, soundless, meaningless, purposeless particles in
motion, describable in purely mathematical terms. The differences
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
114
between dirt, water, rocks, trees, dogs, cats, and human bodies are on
this view superficial.
Common sense, Feser says, takes ordinary physical objects to have
both (a) size, shape, motion, etc. and (b) color, sound, heat, cold, etc.
Early modern philosophers and scientists characterized features of type
(a) as “primary qualities” and features of type (b) as “secondary quali-
ties,” and they argued that the latter are not genuine features of matter
as it is in itself, but reflect only the way conscious awareness presents
matter to us. What exists in mind-independent reality is nothing more
than particles in motion. Color, sound, taste, odor, etc. exist only in the
mind’s experiences of that reality (Feser, 2022a).
But, Feser argues, to draw a sharp distinction between primary and
secondary qualities is much more difficult than it at first appears. The
Aristotelian philosopher who defends common sense would say that this
is a good reason to think that secondary qualities are, after all, as
objective as primary qualities.
The more common approach, however, was to try to make some
version of the primary/secondary quality distinction work, which made
a Cartesian sort of dualism an inevitable consequence of the primary/
secondary quality distinction. For if color, sound, heat, cold, etc. as
common sense understands them don’t exist in matter, then they don’t
exist in the brain or the rest of the body (since those are material). And if
they do nevertheless exist in the mind, then we have the dualist
conclusion that the mind is not identical with the brain or with any other
material thing.
Feser claims that the very conception of matter that modern mate-
rialism has committed itself to is therefore radically incompatible with
materialism. Attempting to develop a materialist account of conscious-
ness while at the same time presupposing the conception of matter
inherited from Galileo and Co. is like trying to square the circle. “It is a
fool’s errand,” Feser opines, “born of conceptual confusion and neglect
of intellectual history” (Feser, 2022a).
To Feser, the hard problem of consciousness is a pseudo-problem. It
arises only if we follow Galileo and his successors in holding that color,
odor, sound, heat, cold, and other “secondary qualities” do not really
exist in matter in the way common sense supposes them to, but instead
exist only in the mind (as the qualia of conscious experience) and are
projected by us onto external reality. If you take this position, Feser says,
you are stuck with a conception of matter that makes it impossible to
regard consciousness as material.
The solution, Feser offers, is simply not to go along with this
assumption in the first place, but to return to the Aristotelian-Scholastic
view the early moderns reacted against, and which is compatible with
the commonsense view of matter. The so-called hard problem of con-
sciousness then dissolves (Feser, 2022b).
Feser highlights Gilbert Ryle’s critical characterization of Descartes’s
dualism as the theory of the “ghost in the machine.” It is often supposed
that modern philosophy and science after Descartes preserved his me-
chanical model of matter while getting rid of the “ghost” of the Cartesian
mind. To Feser, the haunting problem is not the “ghost” but the me-
chanical model of matter (Feser, 2022b).
15.7. Moreland’s Christian soul
Christian philosopher J.P. Moreland defines a robust “generic sub-
stance dualism” as the view according to which “(i) there is a substantial
soul (self, ego, I, substantial form) that is wholly immaterial; (ii) the soul
is not identical to its physical body; and (iii) the soul is that which
grounds personal identity for human persons” (Moreland, 2023). He
defends a Thomistic-like dualism, taking the body to be an ensouled,
spatially extended, physical structure, and the soul to be a substantial,
unified reality that informs (gives form to) its body, animates it and
makes it human. Thus, a body requires a soul to be a body, and this is
why a body is of value. A body without a soul in it is just a corpse. In
contrast to a body, a corpse is of little intrinsic value (Moreland, 2014).
Similarly, a soul requires a body to be fully realized; for a soul to have
a body is its natural state. By analogy, the soul is to the body like God is
to space—it is fully “present” at each point within the body. Breaking the
analogy, Moreland’s soul and body relate to each other in an informing
and cause-effect way (Moreland, 2014).
Moreland argues that the unity of consciousness cannot be explained
if a person is a brain, because a brain is just an aggregate of different
physical (separable) parts. He accepts constituent realism regarding
properties (and relations), according to which properties (and relations)
are universals that, when exemplified (they need not exist), become
constituents of the ordinary particulars that have them. Moreover, he
asserts that whereas a physicalist may claim a unified awareness of one’s
visual field consists of combining several different physical parts of the
brain each terminating a different wavelength, each of which is aware of
only part (not the whole) of the complex view, “this cannot account for
the single, unitary awareness of the entire visual field” (Moreland,
2018).
Offering “a comprehensive defense of contemporary substance
dualism,” Christian philosophers Brandon Rickabaugh and J.P. More-
land present arguments that they claim support substance dualism and
defeat those that deny it. These include: introspection, self-awareness
and intentionality; the fundamental unity of conscious beings (e.g.,
mereological essentialism and the diachronic endurance of the soul);
and updated arguments from modality and libertarian freedom (e.g.,
problems of causal interaction, neuroscientific objections, and causal
closure of the physical) (Rickabaugh and Moreland, 2023).
15.8. Interactive dualism
The primary problem of Dualism—many would say the defeater of
Dualism—is how nonphysical substances could possibly interact with
physical substances, especially given the common assumption that the
physical world is a closed system. Also called the "pairing problem," how
could an immaterial thing, the mind, interact with a material thing, the
body (or brain)? Notwithstanding our folk perception that the physical
world affects my mind through my senses and my mind affects the
physical world through my actions, most scientists and philosophers
deny this is what is in fact happening. There would be no commonalities
between physical and nonphysical substances, no means of exchan-
ge—the problem of mental causation on steroids. Moreover, if
nonphysical substances could somehow affect and alter physical sub-
stances, wouldn’t that require a transference of energy, and wouldn’t
such an addition violate the sacrosanct physical law of the conservation
of energy? (Section: Robinson, 2023; Interactionism, 2023).
Advocates of Interactive Dualism (not that there are many among
scientists and philosophers) say they have resources. They reject the
weak dualism of Epiphenomenalism where the physical affects the
mental but the mental does not affect the physical (9.1.2). They can
claim that the interaction problem is founded on archaic 19th century,
billiard-ball physics, where causation requires hard substances to be in
physical contact, to touch one another, as it were. Quantum mechanics,
on the other hand, allows for various, albeit speculative ways, for the
mental to affect the physical, even beyond the classic but controversial
view that an “observer” is needed to “collapse” the wave function.
Moreover, because quantum mechanics introduces fundamental uncer-
tainty into the universe, and if by this indeterminism holds, nonphysical
substances might enjoy “wiggle room” to effect causation.
Advocates can also appeal to different kinds of ethereal forces or
energy transference systems. Perhaps mental powers can influence the
distribution but not the quantity of energy in the brain (“a little more
here, a little less there” does seem a bit of a cheat). Perhaps each indi-
vidual brain is not a causally closed system so that the conservation of
energy need not apply. Perhaps causal closure for the entire universe is
also a 19th century invention, based on classical thermodynamics and
statistical mechanics, which are now superseded by quantum me-
chanics, general relativity, dark matter, dark energy, and who knows
what else? (I can make up another. Since string theory offers, depending
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
115
on flavor, 10, 11 or 26 “compactified” extra dimensions, why couldn’t
nonphysical substances work via these extra dimensions? I can conceive
of a precedent for this. To account for the “hierarchy problem” in
physics, where gravity is vastly weaker than the other fundamental
forces, some postulate that gravity “leaks” or “bleeds” into these extra
dimensions.) It gets crazy.
That’s not all. Perhaps, one could just blow away the interaction
problem by just asserting that in systems that have minds, the law of
conservation of energy is false. Perhaps because downward causation
goes to the lower physical levels and emergence is enabled, the causal
completeness of physics is wrong (Ellis, 2019). Further, because the
whole idea of a closed physical system is based on the assumption that
there are no nonphysical forces involved, wouldn’t this assumption
undermine the argument against interaction by making it circular? Then
there is “overdetermination,” where mental and physical factors can
each, independently, affect actions—an approach that, while possibly
solving one problem, creates other problems (Robinson, 2023; Inter-
actionism, 2023).
Finally, there is always a theological solution. God can help. God
could have created souls with powers, especially since “real” (i.e., lib-
ertarian) free will is an essential part of “God’s plan,” such that neither
conservation of energy nor determinism holds, at least with respect to
minds. (It is challenging how even God could make this coherent.)
Christian philosopher William Lane Craig describes himself as a
“dualist-interactionalist” in that “the brain is itself part of... the physical
reality with which the soul immediately interacts (Craig, 2015). He ar-
gues that even though souls do not have spatial locations, “the question
becomes why we should think that only spatial relations can pair a cause
with its effect. Prima facie this seems overly restrictive” (Craig, 2023).
I mustn’t forget “Occasionalism,” the idea that created substances,
physical and nonphysical, cannot be efficient causes of events in them-
selves and that all events are caused directly by God. This would mean
that while mind and body appear to interact, in fact it is God that is
changing each separately and ceaselessly. While Occasionalism is dis-
missed (often ridiculed), there is a kind of logic here. If God acts as
intermediary, as it were, between nonphysical and physical substances,
then because God would have created both in the first place, this would
make the apparent causal connection between nonphysical and physical
substances not especially troublesome for God to bring about. This way
of thinking—all these possible mechanisms for Interactive Dual-
ism—reflects the depth of Dualism’s problem.
15.9. Emergent dualism
Emergent dualism is the idea that while mind or consciousness is not
fundamental in reality, it comes into existence “naturally” when a
certain kind of complex arrangement of physical atoms come together,
say, in biological neurons. The resultant new substance that emerges
would be nonphysical, generated by some meta-psychophysical pro-
cesses or laws, and it would become the first-person subject of the mind
or consciousness. This freshly emergent nonphysical substance, to take
the extremes, could be either entirely dependent on the brain for
continued existence or take on independent ontological existence in
some strong sense (though the latter, to me, would seem a rather odd
way for reality to be).
For some philosophers, emergent dualism is a softer-sell “dualism-
light,” because souls would then be a normal part of the physical world,
however extended, where these as-yet-unknown “natural” meta-psy-
chophysical laws would determine their automatic manifestation from
complex structures, especially from brains (perhaps only from brains).
Dualism’s “pairing problem”—how can nonphysical substances
(“souls”) have causal relations with physical substances (brains) with
zero tolerance for failure?—would be reduced under emergent dualisms
because (i) souls would seem in a way tethered in space (Zimmerman,
2005), and (ii) souls would have been generated by physical substances
(brains) in the first place.
As a theist, Richard Swinburne holds the creationist position that
God creates anew each new soul. But, if he came to believe that this
position was mistaken, then, as a theist, he would hold the view that God
had already built into atoms their propensity to produce souls (Swin-
burne, 2016).
Out-of-body and near-death experiences (OBEs and NDEs) are said to
support emergent dualism, in that if one starts by assuming OBEs and
NDEs to be actual disembodied conscious experiences (17.12), then
emergent dualism is said to be a candidate to explain them. And once
this nonphysical substance (soul) comes into existence, it is then logi-
cally possible for this “soul” to become independent of its progenerating
physical substance (brain) and to maintain its existence beyond the
dissolution of the physical (Kopel, 2023).
Finally, there would be no necessity that the kind of meta-psycho-
physical laws that generate emergent dualism should be restricted to
complex arrangements of atoms in biological entities or contexts. Thus,
under emergent dualism, AI consciousness would not be impossible, as it
would be under traditional forms of dualism (AI Consciousness, 24).
15.10. Kind’s dualism 2.0
Philosopher Amy Kind defends dualism 2.0, “a thoroughly modern
version of dualism … decoupled from any religious or non-scientific
connotations.” Her argument is direct and forceful: “A physicalist
framework cannot adequately capture the full reality of our conscious
experience”—which has a “qualitative nature.” However physicalism is
defined, she says, “whether it’s in terms of current physics or future
physics, or some other way entirely—we should see the theory as
committed to an important constraint: Physicalism can be true only if
the phenomenality is not a primitive aspect of the world” (Kind and
Stoljar, 2023, pp. 4, 58).
She analyzes and rejects Materialist Theories of Representationalism
(9.8) and High-order Theories (9.8.3), and Russellian Monism (14.1),
and she deflects the counterattack that “rejecting physicalism is tanta-
mount to believing in ghosts, or fairy dust, or magic.” She stresses that
“the claim that consciousness is not a physical thing does not commit
one to the existence of spooky stuff. Rather, it should be seen as perfectly
consistent with an adoption of a broadly naturalistic conception of the
world and our place in it.” She calls Dualism 2.0 “a rebooted version of
dualism … what it looks like to adopt this kind of view from the vantage
point of the 21st century” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. 5).
Kind’s claim is a simple one: “Just as physical states, events, and
processes are an irreducibly real part of the world, so too are phenom-
enal states, events, and processes an irreducibly real part of the world”
(jointly, “activity”). Given “the existence of both phenomenal activity
and physical activity, and further, in virtue of its claim that these two
kinds of activity cannot be reduced to one another,” she declares that
“the view is appropriately characterized as dualistic.” Immediately,
however, she stresses that “this duality need not be thought of in terms
of mental substances. We can have duality of activity without duality of
entities” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, p. 53).
While obviously distinct from physicalism, Kind’s dualism 2.0 dis-
tinguishes itself from Russellian Monism (and Panpsychism, 13),
because, although the “claim that phenomenality (or proto-
phenomenality) can be found at the fundamental level of reality … is
consistent with dualism 2.0 … it is not required by it.” Dualism 2.0, she
says, “need not take mass and charge to be the appropriate model for
phenomenality.” Nor does dualism 2.0 “commit itself to the ubiquity of
phenomenality,” nor “to anything spooky.” Just because “something
cannot be reduced to the physical” does not mean, ipso facto, “that it is
magical or mystical.” Her example is mathematics (Kind and Stoljar,
2023, pp. 53–54).
What about the physicalist argument that specifying the putative
phenomenal laws seems a project from nowhere? Kind reminds her
critics of their lack of progress “in giving precise physical or functional
specifications of phenomenally conscious states”—and she concludes
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
116
that “dualism 2.0 is not here in any worse shape than its competitors.”
She holds out hope for “a better and broader understanding of the nature
of causation” that could enable us “to accommodate mental causes and
thus affirm the causal efficacy of the phenomenal … without those
seeming either mysterious or spooky” (Kind and Stoljar, 2023, pp.
55–56).
15.11. Soul in the Hebrew Bible and Jewish philosophy
If one wants to pay attention to the nature of consciousness or soul in
the Hebrew scriptures (which is recognized as foundational by tradi-
tional Christianity and Islam as well as by Judaism), there are two
essential words to consider: “nephesh” (נֶפֶשׁ), often translated as “soul,”
and “ruach” (רוּחַ), often translated “spirit.” Neither word is translated
consistently, nor does either map cleanly unto modern meanings of soul
or consciousness.
The essential verse for nephesh is Genesis 2:7: “God formed man from
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,”
and “the man became a living being (or soul, nephesh).” If nephesh is
translated “soul,” that “soul” was not immortal (in that it had to be
described as “living”); it was not a nonphysical substance given to the
man, but rather it was what the man became. Nephesh applies to all
sentient creatures, not just to humans, and although mostly translated
“soul”, it is elsewhere translated as life, person, creature, mind, heart
(emotions), desires. There are several places where the context seems to
require that nephesh be translated “dead”—it would be an odd coupling,
indeed, for nephesh to be an immortal soul and at the same time be dead.
The first use of ruach in the Hebrew bible is Genesis 1:2, where it is
the “spirit” (ruach) of God that is hovering in the darkness over the
surface of the waters of a formless and desolately empty earth. But ruach
is elsewhere translated “wind” (many verses), as well as vigor, courage,
anger, disposition, patience, desire, even mind as the seat of mental acts
or moral courage. Ruach is used in “holy spirit” as well as in God’s spirit.
While neither nephesh nor ruach means soul or consciousness, ruach
seems closer to a mental designator and nephesh closer to a living body
designator.
Philosopher and rabbi Aaron Segal offers a defense of a traditional
Judaic view that there are souls and that they exist long before being
embodied. Responding to the materialist challenge that it’s very sur-
prising that none of us remembers anything from before we were born,
he proposes that each of us has “been in existence for a very long time"
but "only came to be a thinking thing at a certain point in the devel-
opment of her body (or brain).” Other respectable metaphysical views,
he argues, “have us existing for just as long and undergoing trans-
formations no less radical than this. For example, according to one
prominent view, anything that ever exists, always existed and always
will exist. Nothing really goes into or out of existence. What looks like
going into and out of existence is just a matter of going from being ab-
stract (with no causal powers and no location, like a feature) to being
concrete (with causal powers and a particular location, like a person),
and back again. An immaterialist who goes this route need not maintain
that any of us has undergone a transformation so radical as from the
abstract to the concrete: just from unthinking to thinking” (Olson and
Segal, 2023; Segal, 2023).
Segal then moves to a view he calls “closer to home”: animalism—a
prominent version of materialism that each of us is a human organism.
“Quite plausibly,” he says, “animalism has as a consequence that each of
us was once an unthinking fetus. So, according to that prominent version
of materialism, each of us has undergone a transformation from an un-
thinking thing to a thinking thing.”
Physicist/businessman Eduard Shyfrin, who has developed a
“Kabbalah of Information” framework that integrates information the-
ory with the Jewish mystical tradition, calls the Kabbalah soul “the in-
formation entity with the dimension of self that is structurally part of the
informational foundations of the worlds (The Tree of Sefirot)” (Shyfrin,
n.d.).
The Kabbalah of Information, Shyfrin says, holds that God created
only information, nothing else, as the building blocks of all reality. Thus,
there is no fundamental difference between material and spiritual.
Creation is an information space (“infospace”), composed of concepts of
different complexity and dimensionality. The distance between concepts
in infospace is measured by the likeness of their meaning, generating a
form of hierarchy of concepts or “worlds”—as determined by the
Kabbalah Law of Likeness. Moreover, all the worlds are structurally
invariant; the Tree of Sefirot has a fractal structure. The transfer from
one concept to another is incremental; it takes place when information
change reaches an “error threshold” (Shyfrin, 2019).
Based on the above, Shyfrin explains that the “soul” is the informa-
tion structure similar to the structure of the “worlds” (Tree of Sefirot),
with the additional dimension of “self.” This structural similarity allows
for the smooth interaction between the soul and the Tree of Sefirot. Souls
can “move” in infospace, which, for example, is the process of learning
and thinking. All souls intrinsically have the same kinds of concepts in
general, but in particular, souls are distinguished by their taking con-
cepts from different parts of the hierarchy of concepts. This process
determines the “DNA” of the soul and all its potential functions (i.e.,
intellect, memory, etc.) (Shyfrin, 2019).
In addition, according to Shyfrin, because “according to the Torah
the soul is in the blood” (hence the Judaic prohibition against eating
blood), "the information content of part of the soul’s hierarchy may be
structurally similar to that of DNA.” Perhaps, at the moment of the soul’s
creation, "G-D chooses its complexity and dimensionality, which have
hierarchies of structure and which entail the soul’s intellectual
potential."50
15.12. Soul in the New Testament and Christian philosophy
Almost all Christian denominations feature an immortal soul as
essential doctrine and it is conventional wisdom that the immortal soul
is supported by passages in the New Testament. Yet there are opposing
views; for example, Peter van Inwagen’s “Christian materialism” (10.3)
(Van Inwagen, 1995).
Biblical scholar James Tabor points out that although many assume
that the New Testament abandons the Hebrew view of the “soul”
(nephesh) as simply a “living being,” referring in Genesis 1 to all
breathing creatures, such is not the case. The Greek term usually
translated “soul” (ψυχή psykhḗ/psychi) essentially means “life,” and thus
refers to a living “breathing” being; so that rather than having souls,
humans are souls. The central concept is that of breathing or not
breathing—which equates to being alive or dead. Thus “soul” is most
often used for the “self,” which is the “whole” being and it can be
destroyed along with the body (Matthew 10:28). Thus, we read of “fear
coming upon every soul” meaning every individual (Acts 2:23) or Ja-
cob’s children numbering “seventy-five souls”—or persons (Acts 7:14).
The Apostle Paul metaphorically speaks of the dead as “asleep”—no
longer conscious or breathing, so that resurrection is an “awakening” in
a new transformed body. Without the resurrection they would “perish”
(1 Corinthians 15:18). Likewise, giving up the “spirit” (pneuma) is to
breathe one’s last breath and die (John 19:30) (Tabor, 1989; Tabor,
2023b; TaborBlog).
“But, of course, what I assert here can be contested,” Tabor adds,
especially by Christian apologists and theologians who consider the
subsequent idea of the immortal soul fundamental to Christianity.
However, he says, there are very few texts in the New Testament that
picture the “afterlife” in the lower Hadean world as “conscious” or semi-
conscious, or in a state more actively aware than Paul’s metaphor of
50 According to Shyfrin, the Kabbalah Law of Correspondence states that every
concept has a multitude of corresponding concepts in all parts of information
space, which has a fractal, hierarchical structure that generates differences in
complexity and dimensionality.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
117
“sleep,” which is grounded solidly in the Hebrew Bible (Tabor, 2023a).
Historian of ancient religions Jonathan Z. Smith emphasizes the
shifting nature of perceptions taking place in the late Hellenistic/Early
Roman period (200 BCE to 200 CE), when forms of Christianity and
Judaism that became dominant were emerging (Smith, Encyclopedia
Britannica). The shift is from the archaic, which Smith calls the “Loca-
tive” view of the cosmos—in which human beings had their place: death
was death, and life was life—to what he calls the “Utopian”—a perfect
heavenly world beyond this one in which we really “belong” or to which
we “return” (Tabor, 2022).
Still, by and large, the New Testament is strikingly “Hebraic” in its
views of body, soul, and spirit as constituting the whole person, and
death or the grave as a place of no return—except that the idea of
resurrection provided future hope of “making the dead live,” which is
the standard Hebrew expression to this day (Tabor and Wise, 1995).
Christian philosopher Andrew Ter Ern Loke surveys, from a Christian
perspective, how human beings are generated (after Adam and Eve). In
the early church there were three competing views: Traducianism,
Creationism and Pre-existence, all of which assume substance dualism.
According to Traducianism, God uses parents to create the souls of
children; according to Creationism, the souls of children are directly
created by God (either at or soon after biological conception). Pre-ex-
istence is the doctrine that God has a “stock of souls from eternity and
allocates them as needed” (Loke, 2022).
Pre-existence is widely regarded as unorthodox, while theologians
have been divided on Traducianism and Creationism, with Augustine
acknowledging that he does not know which position is the correct one.
Creationism has been the dominant though informal position in
Reformed Theology and the Catholic Church since the time of Peter
Lombard (c. 1100–1160), while Traducianism has been the dominant
position in Lutheran theology51 (Loke, 2022).
Loke proposes a possible way in which Traducianism and Creation-
ism may be combined, utilizing a modified hylomorphic theory of
human souls such that, “while the soulish potentialities are passed down
from parents to children in accordance with Traducianism, the partic-
ular restrictions on the form of soul-stuffs are created by God so as to
bring into existence particular individuals.”52 Separately, Christian
substance dualism is said to be consistent with Darwinian evolution
(Loke, 2022).
Souls, of course, remain core Christian doctrine, and they are
defended as “a better explanation for consciousness.” Dualism is said to
imply theism and that dualism and theism are “ontologically tied
together.” Joshua Farris “advances a case for the person or self as being
the fundamental bearer of conscious properties … where the primary
bearer, binder, and ground of consciousness is the soul as an immaterial
substance” (Farris, 2023, 2024).
15.13. Soul in Islamic philosophy
In Islam, the nature of the soul is a central concern, and is not dis-
similar to the soul in Christianity and Judaism (understandable because
the three developed side by side during the Middle Ages, rather
harmoniously, too). Building on ancient and Neo-Platonist philosophers,
medieval Islamic philosophers, mainly al-Kindî, al-Farabi, Avicenna,
and Averroes, developed an Islamic metaphysic of the soul by evaluating
the concepts of intellect, soul, nafs and body. Especially important is
nafs, which literally means “self,” but can be translated “psyche” and
“soul.” In building an Islamic theory of consciousness, the relationship
between the soul and body is shaped by the unification of the soul with
the body, the soul’s effect on the body, the soul’s independence, the state
of the body, the separation of the soul after the body’s death, and
whether the soul preserves its individuality (Islamic Soul-Body, 2020).
Avicenna has the soul in an accidental relation to a particular body,
given that body’s need for a central organizing and sustaining principle.
“The soul itself is generated by the separate intelligences of the heavens
and emanated by them upon the body” (Ivry, 2012).
Averroes focuses on the hierarchical structure of the soul, with each
faculty sustained by a lower, more material, or less “spiritual,” faculty.
Thus, the nutritive faculty is substrate for the sensory faculty, which is
substrate for the common-sense faculty, which is substrate for the
imaginative faculty, which is, finally, the substrate for the rational fac-
ulty. While consciousness per se is not a direct concern, it would be
enriched at each level (Ivry, 2012).
The Islamic scholar, teacher and classicist Hamza Yusuf describes the
Islamic understanding of consciousness as “a spiritual light that God has
placed into the human being.” It’s not metaphor, he says, “It’s a light, a
spiritual light.” Noting that the term “consciousness” is relatively new
and that “the pre-moderns would have had a very different view of
things,” Yusuf explains that in a person’s relationship with God, “the
mirror of the soul has to be polished because the light cannot shine
properly unless there is a polishing. Remembrance of God is how one
polishes the soul.” He adds, "the human soul is considered ’aeviternal;’ it
has a beginning but no end" (Yusuf, 2023).
Contemporary Islamic philosopher Seyyed Hossein Nasr presents a
full flowering of the soul in the afterlife, similar to the Tibetan Book of the
Dead or Hindu doctrines of the afterlife. In some sense, he says, devel-
opment does not stop with death. “Something stops,” he says, “but the
soul continues to develop” (Nasr, 2007).
According to Nasr, Islam identifies paradise with a garden, which
includes sexuality as well as eating—these raise, not lower, the value of
paradise, he says. “All of these are to cut the soul loose from attraction to
the lower reflections of these realities and have the soul gaze upon the
real reality itself. That’s what paradise is. And even within paradise,
there are levels. The highest paradise is called the paradise of the
essence, in which every single concept and idea and limited form of
existence is transcended beyond the paradisal estate in the ordinary
sense.”
The state of the soul, Nasr says, is “meta cosmic,” a kind of merging
without destruction of the individual. “It’s what Meister Eckhart called
‘fusion without confusion’—a beautiful expression. It’s like swimming in
the ocean of divinity. To transcend that into divine unity is what you
might call a bi-unity. By some great mystery, we are given the power to
be conscious of our own nothingness in divinity” (Nasr, 2007).
15.14. God as the supplier of souls
Many in the Abrahamic religious traditions—Judaism, Christianity,
Islam—believe that God dispenses souls actively to each individual
(whether at birth, conception or some arbitrary time is irrelevant here).
Whether all these original souls are the same kind of tabula rasa,
indistinguishable initially one from another, or whether each soul has its
own particular properties or propensities, is a matter of debate.
Aaron Segal addresses another anti-dualist challenge—i.e., dualism
would require material things like our bodies to have the extraordinary
power to generate souls ex nihilo—by invoking the God who created
them. “If God exists,” he argues, “then God might well be creating those
souls in accordance with the laws; otherwise, this process would happen
by itself. Either way, I’m not sure how much more extravagance any of
this adds to the fact that souls are coming into existence ex nihilo in the
first place. God is already supposed to be able to create ex nihilo, so if
God is creating the souls, this would add no more extravagance at all. If
God isn’t involved, there would be no agent at all creating the souls—the
51 For other Christian philosophers, see Baker (2005).
52 According to Loke, this proposal provides a metaphysical explanation for
the counterfactuals of human freedom that are required by so-called “middle
knowledge,” which seeks to reconcile divine predestination and human free
will, whereby God via God’s perfect knowledge knew prior to Creation what
every free creature would freely do if instantiated in any and all circumstances.
Loke says his commitment to substance dualism does not depend on which
model is correct, not even his own.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
118
body would be no more of an agent than the sun is in growing trees”
(Olson and Segal, 2023; Segal, 2023).
A few religious denominations, especially in the Christian tradition,
go further and assert that not only does God dispense a soul to each
individual, but also God makes a determination, prior to or at that
moment of allocation, what the future holds for that individual soul-
person: the soul-person’s ultimate destiny, whether that soul-person will
attain salvation or be condemned to damnation. This controversial
doctrine is called “predestination,” and most mainstream religions reject
it (Predestination, 2024).
15.15. Personal and cosmic consciousness in Indian philosophy
Theories of consciousness that developed in the ancient Indian sub-
continent, based on the Vedic scriptures, focus on the relationship be-
tween individual human consciousness and cosmic consciousness.
Roughly, there were two major views: each individual human con-
sciousness is a “piece,” as it were, of the cosmic consciousness, or each
individual human consciousness, in some mystical sense, is the entirety
of the cosmic consciousness, even though there are innumerable in-
stantiations of the same thing (Sarvapriyananda, 2023b; Sarvapriya-
nanda, 2023a; Medhananda, 2023).
These centers of individual consciousness would reincarnate through
countless cycles of birth, death, and rebirth before a final disposition
would be made, with the individual consciousness being absorbed back
into the cosmic consciousness, as if a single drop of rain, having evap-
orated from the ocean, condenses back into it.
While the main Advaita Vedanta tradition is nondualist, meaning
that consciousness is the only fundamental existent and all else,
including the entire physical world, is derived from consciousness, there
are minority schools that maintain that the physical world has realist
existence (Medhananda, 2022, 2023).
Historically, and perhaps ironically, one of the oldest Indian philo-
sophical schools, Samkhya, advocated the fundamental existence of two
distinct, universal realities: prakriti is matter or nature (time, space,
energy), and purusha is consciousness or spirit. While the entirety of our
perceived universe is nature (prakriti), including our bodies and brains,
even our minds and emotions, that which experiences the external world
and the internal world of the mind is consciousness or the self (purusha).
Hence, dualism (Sarvapriyananda, 2020). Swami Sarvapriyananda ex-
plains: “The Samkhyans were strict dualists. They said there is no larger
consciousness. Each of us is an individual consciousness” (Sarvapriya-
nanda, 2023b).
According to Swami Medhananda, Samkhya is indeed dualist. It is
founded on the eternal purusha (spirit or self), which alone is sentient; it
is the witness-consciousness; it is absolute, independent, free, beyond
perception, above any experience by mind or senses, and impossible to
describe in words. Everything else (including the mind) is only a
modification of insentient prakriti (primordial nature); it is inactive,
unconscious, and is a balance of the three gunas (qualities or innate
tendencies) (Medhananda, 2022; Samkhya, 2024).
As Swami Vivekananda explains, the English word “mind” corre-
sponds to what Samkhya philosophers call the antaḥkaraṇa (internal
organ), which comprises four aspects: the cogitating or thinking faculty;
the will (or the intellect); the self-conscious egotism; and the substance
in and through which all the faculties act, the floor of the mind as it
were. Swami Vivekananda describes the Samkhyan approach to con-
sciousness: “Mind, intelligence, will, and everything else is insentient.
But they are all reflecting the sentiency, the cit [consciousness] of some
being who is beyond all this, whom the Samkhya philosophers call
puruṣha.” Thus, Samkhya has a metaphysical dualism between conscious
spirit and insentient matter. Fundamentally, even the mind (antaḥkar-
aṇa) is actually a subtle form of insentient matter, but it appears to be
conscious because of the “light” of the puruṣha behind it (Medhananda,
2022). In other words, the body/brain is “a gross form of matter” and the
mind is “a subtle form of matter”—and the soul is necessary to
“illuminate the mind with consciousness” (Medhananda, 2023).
Souls have always existed; souls are not created by God or by any-
thing else; souls are part of the divine consciousness. How then do we
each have our own unique conscious perspective? Swami Medhananda’s
mechanism is that "the one divine consciousness playfully limits itself" in
the form of each person’s private consciousnesss (Medhananda, 2023).
To enrich contemporary debate about consciousness, Swami Med-
hananda calls for considering the relevance and epistemic credentials of
meditative techniques and spiritual experience. Doing such, he says,
would bring philosophy of mind into fruitful dialogue with philosophy
of religion (Medhananda, 2022).
Indian philosopher and yogi (and nationalist) Sri Aurobindo envi-
sions an ongoing, progressing evolution of consciousness as a prime
feature of world meaning and human purpose. “He holds that the human
mind is much too imperfect a type of consciousness to be the final resting
point of nature, and that just as life developed out of matter, and mind
out of life, a still higher form of consciousness is bound to develop out of
the mind” (Cornelissen, 2004).
Sri Aurobindo bases the ontology of his evolutionary consciousness
on the Ved¯antic view of consciousness, which, in one telling, says that
“consciousness is pervasive throughout reality and that it manifests as a
range of ever-higher gradations of consciousness and being.” In each
category of reality, consciousness has its tailored form. “In matter,
consciousness is fully engrossed in its own existence and shows itself
only as matter’s habit of form and its tendency to obey fixed laws. In
plant and animal life, consciousness begins to emancipate a little, there
are the first signs of exchange, of giving and taking, of feelings, drives
and emotions. In the human mind we see a further emancipation of
consciousness in the first appearance of an ability to ‘play with ideas in
one’s mind’ and to rise above the immediate situation.” The mind,
however, constitutes opposing characteristics. On the one hand, it is “the
plane of objective, generalized statements, ideas, thoughts, intelligence,
etc.” On the other hand, it “is also an inveterate divider, making dis-
tinctions between subject and object, I and thou, things and other
things” (Cornelissen, 2004).
From the Vedic perspective, “ordinary human mentality is consid-
ered to be only the most primitive form of mental consciousness, most
ego-bound, most dependent on the physical senses. Above it there is the
unitary Higher Mind of self-revealed wisdom, the Illumined Mind where
truths are seen rather than thought, the plane of the Intuitive Mind
where truth is inevitable and perfect, and finally the cosmic Overmind,
the mind of the Gods, comprehensive, all-encompassing.” But one must
rise beyond all of them to find ultimate perfection, “one with the divine
consciousness that upholds the universe” (Cornelissen, 2004).
While various spiritual traditions have set life’s highest goal as
connecting or even merging with the absolute consciousness, Sri Auro-
bindo distinguishes his vision by announcing, “It is at this moment for
the first time becoming possible to let a supramental consciousness enter
into one’s being and transform it in every respect.” It is this “compre-
hensive, supramental transformation of all aspects of human nature”
that is the central theme of Sri Aurobindo’s work—and it is his grand
prediction that human progress via the evolution of consciousness will
eventually bring about “supramental consciousness as much an intrinsic,
‘natural’ part of earthly life as our ordinary mentality is now” (Corne-
lissen, 2004).
According to Ravi Gomatam, a quantum physicist and a monk of the
Gaudiya Vaishnava (GV) Vedanta school of India, GV Vedanta is mono-
theistic, with a pluralist ontology that distinguishes between the ener-
getic personal God (shaktiman) and the diverse energies (shaktis) such as
consciousness and matter, which emanate from God. Both the energetic
personal God (the Universal "I”) and his diverse energies, which include
consciousness and matter, are ontologically real. While the material
atoms lack consciousness and therefore are indistinguishable, the plane
of non-material consciousness comprises innumerable individual units
of consciousness, each with its own unique “I” (Gomatam, 2021).
Yet, Gomatam says, GV Vedanta is uniquely compatible with the
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
119
materialistic perspective informing modern cognitive science—namely
that thinking, feeling, willing, intelligence, and even our present sense of
“I” spring entirely from matter. This is via the GV Vedanta idea that
many properties of consciousness can be separated from consciousness
and instantiated in appropriate complementary “levels of matter,” a
novel technical concept that Gomatam is introducing through his work
in the foundations of quantum mechanics. He says it is different from the
prevailing idea of hierarchy of matter at various scales in physics.
The color, size and shape of an apple can be instantiated on paper. A
plastic apple may instantiate even further properties of the apple, such
as its 3-dimensional shape, weight and texture. In either case, the apple
itself is not reduced to the painting or the plastic object that instantiates
its properties. Similarly, Gomatam explains, GV Vedanta allows various
traits of consciousness to be instantiated sans consciousness in matter at
various “levels” of matter, which are mutually exclusive, causal realms
that complement one another, with each higher level not being consti-
tuted by its lower levels (Gomatam, 1987).
Even though matter instantiates properties such as thinking, feeling,
experience and even an “I” via an apparent self onto these levels of
matter, matter itself is not aware it carries these cognitive and affective
properties. Only consciousness can know matter has these properties.
GV Vedanta further explains that we mistake these materially
instantiated traits to be part of our intrinsic consciousness due to maya
(illusion), imposed upon the individual souls in the material world by
the Universal Person (purushottama), from whom all individual “I”s
emanate, but who is different from them. In this way, Gomatam suggests
that GV Vedanta can contribute novel, sophisticated notions of levels of
matter to instantiate various features of consciousness, without reducing
consciousness itself to matter. Gomatam points out that here GV
Vedanta differs from Advaita Vedanta, which holds both matter and
individual “I”s to be ultimately non-existent, and admits only an
impersonal Universal “I”. Jainism and Buddhism, two other schools of
Indian thought, additionally treat the Universal “I,” personal or imper-
sonal, to be also non-existent (Gomatam, 2021).
15.16. Soul in indigenous religions
The concept of the soul, in multifarious forms, has infused indige-
nous and folk religions throughout the world, and although we tend to
categorize these ancient belief systems as “pre-modern” and “pre-sci-
entific,” lacking the sophistication of the major Eastern and Abrahamic
traditions, we may be remiss not to recognize the data and to assess its
implications (if any). The geographic ubiquity of soul belief, spanning
the globe and including all racial and cultural groups, and its resiliency
over time, should not be ignored.
The cognitive science of religion, a relatively recent field of inquiry,
can account for beliefs in supernatural agents and entities, from souls
and ghosts to angels and gods (Barrett, 2000; Boyer, 2001; Lawson,
1993). Psychologist Justin Barrett’s idea of a “hyperactive agent
detection device” can explain why human beings evolved concepts of
gods and spirits. (Barrett asserts that this evolved psychological mech-
anism is agnostic on whether such gods and spirits would actually exist:
“Having a scientific explanation for mental phenomena does not mean
we should stop believing in them,” he says [Barrett, 2012].)
Although the soul in indigenous religions is often more a vital prin-
ciple or an immanent power resident in all animate and even inanimate
objects, not a non-physical substance in each individual, there is wide
recognition of spiritual aspects of human beings. While it is not fruitful
to try to discern the metaphysics of what is designated by some ab-
origines as "spirit of the man," or "spirit in the man," there is certainly
widespread belief in the existence of forces, powers and entities beyond
their physical worlds (Rivi`ere, 1987, 2005).
Whether these beliefs can be classified as substance dualism as
presently conceived is debatable, although numerous examples show
that “there exists a quite noticeable distinction between the body
element and the diversity of spiritual entities that one may call ‘souls’ for
the sake of convenience, entities that may have the body as a prop.”
What James Frazer in The Golden Bough called the “external soul” has
some characteristics of dualism’s souls or spirits, such as the capacity to
depart the body during dreams. (Differences include, for example, the
external soul living in an animal double or in one’s shadow.)
The origin of the indigenous soul, compared with that of dualism’s
soul, also has similarities (e.g., coming from an almighty spirit) and
differences (e.g., obtained as a gift or by conquest or by choice). The Ewe
of Togo use specific, separate terms for the "substance of the soul" and
the "breath of life," and believe that the individual, before incarnation,
exists as a spirit, and together with the supreme creator (Mawu-Lisa) he
or she chooses their own destiny. Other indigenous groups have very
physical means to obtain souls, such as pilgrimage, fasting, eating,
combat and killing (Rivi`ere, 1987, 2005).
Regarding its destiny after death, souls can reach new worlds in
which to live or be transmitted as a vital force to descendants. The
majority believe that after death their ancestors live in another world.
Many African religions focus on ancestors, who, in some cases, can
reincarnate in a newborn baby.
The Native American Dakota have four types of souls (given by the
sky god): one is judged after death—if deserving, one’s soul enters the
world of spirits; if not, it must wander forever. Almost everywhere, the
soul after death involves a gradual purification through a series of trials.
The ultimate destination is a celestial space or an undifferentiated earth-
based place (underground, marshes, desert). While living in the other
world, the dead person can be present elsewhere; as a specter or a ghost
(Rivi`ere, 1987, 2005).
In Chinese folk religion, the majority of supernatural beings are
thought to originate from the "souls" of dead people (Harrell, 1979).
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) is said to engage “a deeper level of
consciousness that touches various organs of the human body.” Every
organ is in some sense involved in consciousness. This includes the
brain, of course, but it also includes the liver, the kidney, the heart, etc.
each with its own essence or contribution, thus forming “an integrated
consciousness system.” “Shen” (神) is the TCM concept corresponding to
“consciousness” and the classic TCM text (Huangdi Neijing) describes
“how to understand the meaning of Shen in the heart, soul in the liver,
meaning in the spleen, soul in the lungs, essence in the kidney, and will.”
According to TCM theory, “the human body is a little universe. Things
outside the body form the big universe. These outside and inside uni-
verses are closely connected together in one holistic overall system.” The
claim is that this idea corresponds to the cognitive-science concepts of
embodiment, specifically Ecological Psychology (9.6.7) and Embodied
Cognition (9.6.1) (Lu et al., 2022).
The imaginative varieties of indigenous souls reflect the richness and
abundance of human creativity. The Fang of Gabon name seven types of
souls: three disappear at death; two persevere after death; one is a dis-
incarnated spirit (which can appear as a ghost); and one is “both shadow
and soul.” (Harrell, 1979). While these “souls” are not dualist sub-
stances, they reflect aspects of dualism.
No claim is made that souls in indigenous religions, however ubiq-
uitous, corroborate dualism as a theory of consciousness. On the other
hand, the substantial and similar anthropological data should at least be
acknowledged.
15.17. Realms of the soul
Many, I’d say most, religious traditions present elaborate levels or
stages or realms of the soul, accommodating the soul and its elaborate
journeys before birth and after death—Yog¯ac¯ara Buddhism, Sufism in
Islam, Kabbalah in Judaism, Christian mysticism, occult sects such as
Theosophy (15.18). These religions espouse different doctrines super-
ficially, but the complex, multi-level, multi-dimensional, geometric
structures of the habitats of the soul—the bewildering imagery of what
souls are, where they come from, where they go, what they do—look
remarkably alike.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
120
While such visions of the soul do not address directly the essence of
consciousness, the fact that they espouse a nonphysical substance or
entity, the soul, that is prominent, primitive, and permanent makes
personal consciousness derivative and hence also nonphysical.
Yet, all this means little for purposes of this dualism category. In no
way does any of this, in no way does all of this, add verisimilitude to the
story of souls, but humanity’s fascination, obsession, with souls cannot
be denied.
15.18. Theosophy’s eclectic soul and consciousness
Soul and consciousness are core doctrines of Theosophy, an occult
amalgam of esoteric ideas from Western and Eastern religions, traditions
and philosophies. Theosophy defines itself as “Wisdom-religion” or
"Divine Wisdom,” and considers itself “The substratum and basis of all
the world-religions and philosophies, taught and practiced by a few elect
ever since man became a thinking being” (Theosophy, 2023).
Theosophy’s “soul” describes three of the seven principles that are
said to compose human beings: animal soul (astral body, astral shape,
and the animal or physical intelligence); human soul (“a compound in its
highest form, of spiritual aspirations, volitions, and divine love; and in
its lower aspect, of animal desires and terrestrial passions imparted to it
by its associations with its vehicle, the seat of all these”); spiritual soul
(“irrational in the sense that as a pure emanation of the Universal mind it
can have no individual reason of its own on this plane of matter”) (Soul,
2023).
The Secret Doctrine, Theosophy’s primary text (written by its founder,
Madame Blavatsky), speaks of consciousness as “the dark mystery of
non-Being; unconscious, yet absolute Consciousness; unrealisable, yet
the one self-existing reality.” The state of consciousness is described as
“beyond limitation, and hence is beyond the cognizer, cognition and
cognized.” It is the state attained in Nirvana, a state “in which all sense
of individuality is merged in the whole” (Consciousness, Absolute, n.d.).
Theosophy approaches personal consciousness “as sentience or
awareness of internal and external existence.” In this view, Theosophy’s
consciousness “includes any kind of cognition, experience, feeling, or
perception.” A special case of consciousness is "self-consciousness" or
"self-awareness," which is “the experience or perception of one’s own
personality or individuality.” Theosophy’s consciousness is “a funda-
mental (not an emergent) property of the cosmos, which is present in
everything including inorganic matter.” The implication of this univer-
sal ubiquity is that “consciousness is not necessarily a cognitive function
as normally experienced by humans, but rather the more basic ability to
perceive and respond to the environment in some form.” Thus, Theos-
ophy regards each individual atom as “possessing a principle of con-
sciousness in its most basic form. This does not mean that there is some
process of thinking in the atom.” Rather, "’atomic consciousness’ could
be its ability to ‘perceive’ or ‘identify’ atoms with which it has affinity,
responding to them by forming molecules” (Consciousness, 2023).
In Theosophy’s telling, there are many levels of consciousness,
“depending on the plane or body through which it manifests.” In addi-
tion, the difference between consciousness and self-consciousness is also
important, “since the latter is said to be a special feature that is fully
developed only in human beings, especially in connection to the phys-
ical plane” (Consciousness, 2023).
A contemporary Theosophy thinker is Edi Bilimoria, an engineer,
classical musician and life-long student of perennial philosophy. He
takes “Unfolding Consciousness” as his overarching framework “to show
how the Universal Wisdom Tradition—the Perennial Philosophy—and
the corroboration of some of its tenets by enlightened science of the
quantum era, broadens and contextualises mainstream science beyond
its existing metaphysical limitations.” He explores, “in the manner of the
Universal Wisdom Tradition, the unfolding of Consciousness from its
Unmanifest and Implicate realms, through Cosmos, and Man.” Mind and
consciousness, he contends, cannot be wholly explained without in-
depth understanding of “the subtle (i.e., non-physical) bodies of the
human being on all levels” (Bilimoria, 2022; Bilimoria, n.d.).
15.19. Steiner’s esoteric soul and consciousness
The esotericist, philosopher and spiritual teacher Rudolf Steiner had
a complex and changing relationship with Theosophy, from apologist
and thought leader to competitor and reprobate. He developed a large
following in his time, which to some degree continues. His “spiritual
science” sought to expand knowledge and wisdom (Steiner, 2024.)
Consciousness, particularly the evolution of consciousness, is central
to Steiner’s belief system and spiritual teachings. He explains “how it is
possible to develop higher faculties of consciousness—Imagination,
Inspiration, and Intuition”—and how humanity could “gradually take in
hand its own destiny through the conscious and free development of
spiritual capacities.” He devoted much of his teaching to the esoterica of
consciousness and soul, describing vividly “one’s life after death and the
progress of the individual through the planetary spheres where tasks and
goals for future incarnations are prepared in cooperation with the
spiritual beings of the Hierarchies” (Steiner, 1923a).
Steiner differentiates consciousness from “soul life,” though they are
obviously related. His consciousness is a “continuous stream of visuali-
zations,” while it is “not the same thing as the continuous stream of the
soul life.” Moreover, “a visualization can live on in the soul without
entering consciousness.” This relates to memories, which are usually not
conscious and are held in our soul life, and “in order to be conscious of
them [memories] we must first call them up out of the unconscious life
of the soul by an act of will.” Consciousness, Steiner says, “illuminates
but a part of the soul life” (Steiner, 1909).
Steiner defines consciousness in (at least) two ways: (i) the over-
lapping in the present of the current (streams or flows) of emotions
coming out of the future and the current of visualizations flowing out of
the past; and (ii) the meeting of the astral and etheric bodies (Steiner,
1909, 1923b). What does this mean?
Steiner states that “the riddles of consciousness will be solved and the
whole peculiar nature of the soul life clarified if you start with the
premise that the current of desire, love and hate comes to meet you out
of the future, and meets the current of visualizations flowing out of the
past into the future. At every moment you are actually in the midst of
this encounter of the two streams, and considering that the present
moment of your soul life consists of such a meeting, you will readily
understand that these two currents overlap in your soul. This overlapping
is consciousness” (Steiner, 1909).
To get a sense of how such overlapping happens, one begins with
Steiner’s description of the human being as having seven distinct
members, the first three of which are “bodies”—physical, etheric,
astral—and the fourth is Ego or I. The physical body covers the workings
of physics and chemistry. The etheric body or “life body” describes forces
or energy fields that are spatial and take the form of our physical body.
The astral body expresses affect, feelings and emotions, and has
“movements,” such as expansion and contraction (reflecting positive
and negative emotions, respectively).
To Steiner, how these bodies articulate is critical. For example,
“throughout the whole of an earthly life the physical body and the
etheric remain together, never separating even when, in sleep, the
etheric body and the astral body have to part company.” Similarly, the
Ego and the astral body never “part from one another during life on
Earth. In our waking state we give life to our senses through our Ego, and
through the astral body to our nervous system” (Steiner, 1923b).
Two critical elements are: (i) “clairvoyant consciousness about the
etheric and astral bodies,” and (ii) “the intersection of the two streams …
the two currents meet in the physical body.” In this way, Steiner har-
monizes his two definitions of consciousness—overlapping streams of
emotions from the future and of visualizations from the past, and the
meeting of the astral and etheric bodies, the two streams intersecting in
the physical body.
What happens “when a man passes through the gate of death,” as
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
121
Steiner puts it? To simplify, “The etheric body detaches itself from the
physical body—something that never happens during earthly life. And
now, when the etheric body is free of the physical, all that has been
interwoven into the etheric body is gradually dispersed … the experi-
ences that have gradually penetrated into the etheric body … pass out
into the universal cosmic ether, and dissolve.” Steiner offers an intricate
tapestry of the worlds beyond death: spiritual beings, a speaking uni-
verse, uniting with the whole Cosmos, the music of the spheres, rebirths,
and more (I spare the reader the details) (Steiner, 1923b).
15.20. Nonphysical component in the human mind
This theory of consciousness is a generalized notion that in order to
make the human mind, some kind of “nonphysical component,” working
with the human brain, might be needed. It is the speculative position I
took in my first paper, published in 1969, where I emphasized that such
a hypothetical nonphysical component would not be a traditional
immortal soul (Kuhn, 1969).
I did not impute to this nonphysical component, on its own, con-
sciousness or any kind of awareness, only its (potential) power, when
working with the human brain, to transform the human brain into the
human mind. I can almost find, if I stretch, parallels or resonance with
Polkinghorne’s “information-bearing pattern.” (14.5) and Van Inwa-
gen’s “naked kernel” (10.3).
Here I distinguish human mind from consciousness, which we pre-
sume to exist in many animals. Few doubt that mammals such as pri-
mates, dogs, and cetaceans are conscious and have mental experiences.
Human mind and consciousness are like intersecting, non-overlapping
Venn diagrams: some but not all of human mind is consciousness, and
some (but not all) of consciousness is human mind; stated in reverse,
aspects of human mind go beyond consciousness and instances of con-
sciousness go beyond human mind.
My 1969 conjecture was that a “nonphysical component” might be
needed to explain the vast difference between the mental outputs of
humans and other mammals, especially those whose brains are larger
than human brains.
To pursue the speculation, if consciousness per se requires some kind
of dualist theory, and if human mentality is step-function qualitatively
superior to any animal mentality, it might follow that if a certain kind of
nonphysical component is needed for human consciousness, then
perhaps a different nonphysical component structure is needed for an-
imal consciousness.
To crawl farther out on this shaky limb, such a nonphysical
component difference between humans and animals could come about
in two ways: (i) human and animal consciousness have different kinds of
nonphysical components; or (ii) there is one kind of nonphysical
component for pure consciousness, applicable to both humans and other
animals equally, and another kind of nonphysical component that
transforms basic animal consciousness into human consciousness. (Un-
daunted by nested speculations, I had a curious Bible story where this
might apply.53)
Suffice it to say that I wrote my “nonphysical component” paper
more than 55 years prior to writing this paper, so I ask that my views
(and my style) then should not color too darkly my views now. (Well,
maybe just a bit of coloring is fair …)
16. Idealisms
Idealism is consciousness as ultimate reality, the fullness of the
deepest level of all existence, the singular fundamental existent. It is the
theory of consciousness that takes consciousness to its maximum
meaning. The focus here is ontological idealism, where ultimate reality
is mind or awareness or thought, while everything else, including all
physical worlds and universes and all that they contain, are derivative or
illusionary. (I do not consider epistemological idealism, where all we
can know is constrained by the structure of human thought.) (Guyer and
Horstmann, 2023).
Consciousness as ultimate reality is the age-old claim, rooted in some
wisdom traditions, that the only reality that’s “really real” is con-
sciousness—everything else, from physical laws to physical brains, is the
generative product of an all-pervading and all-encompassing “cosmic
consciousness.” Each individual instance of consciousness—human,
animal, artificial or otherwise—is a subset of this cosmic consciousness,
the ultimate superset.
Idealism has a rich intellectual history, especially in the 18th century
(e.g., Berkeley, Kant) and 19th century (e.g., Hegel, Bradley); it was
anticipated by elements of 17th century philosophy and continued to
develop into the 20th century (Guyer and Horstmann, 2023). Though
often eliciting “the incredulous stare" (in David Lewis’s delightful
phrase), Idealism is taken seriously by philosophers. Moreover, it is the
foundation of major religious traditions, especially among those that
arose in ancient India.
To the surprise of some, Idealism as a theory of consciousness has not
been fading in light of scientific advances. If anything, Idealism’s
explanatory star seems on the ascent, shining brighter, as consciousness
maintains its mysteries and Idealism attracts more adherents.
David Chalmers muses, “One starts as a materialist, then one be-
comes a dualist, then a panpsychist, and one ends up as an idealist. I
don’t know where this comes from, but I think the idea was something
like this. First, one is impressed by the successes of science, endorsing
materialism about everything and so about the mind. Second, one is
moved by problem of consciousness to see a gap between physics and
consciousness, thereby endorsing dualism, where both matter and con-
sciousness are fundamental. Third, one is moved by the inscrutability of
matter to realize that science reveals at most the structure of matter and
not its underlying nature, and to speculate that this nature may involve
consciousness, thereby endorsing panpsychism. Fourth, one comes to
think that there is little reason to believe in anything beyond con-
sciousness and that the physical world is wholly constituted by con-
sciousness, thereby endorsing idealism” (Chalmers, 2020d).
Chalmers defines idealism broadly “as the thesis that the universe is
fundamentally mental, or perhaps that all concrete facts are grounded in
mental facts. As such it is meant as a global metaphysical thesis analo-
gous to physicalism, the thesis that the universe is fundamentally
physical, or perhaps that all concrete facts are grounded in physical
facts. The only difference is that ‘physical’ is replaced by ‘mental.’”
Idealists are not necessarily committed to anti-realist views about the
physical world, though some are, especially among Eastern traditions. It
is perfectly coherent for an idealist to regard the physical world as “real”
in the sense that it exists when no one is looking; “it just has a surprising
nature,” having been formed from mental fundamentals (Chalmers,
2020d).
Chalmers distinguishes three types of idealism. (i) “Micro-idealism is
the thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in micro-level men-
tality: that is, in mentality associated with fundamental microscopic
entities (such as quarks and photons).” (ii) “Macro-idealism is the thesis
that concrete reality is wholly grounded in macro-level mentality: that
is, in mentality associated with macroscopic (middle-sized) entities such
53 At one point in my early ruminations, I wondered if there was anything in
the Bible that might reflect the essence of human-level consciousness, dis-
tinguishing humans from other animals. In Daniel 4, an incredible account is
given of King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon, who was “driven from men and
dwelt with the beasts of the field” for seven years: “Let his heart [mind] be
changed from man’s, and let a beast’s heart [mind] be given unto him.” (Dan. 4:
16). Then, after the seven years, “my understanding returned to me and I
blessed the most High.” (Dan. 4:34). Assume (for the moment) that this really
happened, how could this have literally happened? Mental illness and its
spontaneous remission would be a naturalistic explanation. I speculated
something else: a change made to some “nonphysical substance” in Nebu-
chadnezzar’s mind; conveniently, I had a “nonphysical component” at the
ready.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
122
as humans and perhaps non-human animals.” (iii) “Cosmic idealism is the
thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in cosmic mentality: that
is, in mentality associated with the cosmos as a whole or with a single
cosmic entity (such as the universe or a deity)” (Chalmers, 2020d).
Thus, micro-idealism has all fundamental forces and particles as
entirely (not in part) mental; macro-idealism privileges what we
commonly call mental as somehow constituting the foundations of re-
ality; and cosmic idealism can be conceived as kinds of pantheism or
theism, though not the dominant strands, of course. Moreover, there is
resonance between these three kinds of idealism with three similar kinds
of panpsychism, the rough difference being that whereas in panpsy-
chism the mental, while everywhere, is not everything; in idealism, the
mental is both everything and everywhere.
To Huston Smith, world religion expert and devotee, matter is not
fundamental, but consciousness is. “Matter is like an iceberg protruding
out of the sea of consciousness.” Consciousness can never be destroyed,
he said, but “can oscillate between different forms,” which leads, he
recognizes, to the issue of death. “We know what our consciousness is
like; we can’t explain it, but we can experience it. What will it be when
we drop our body? Well, what we can say is if consciousness is the
fundamental reality and it can’t be destroyed, consciousness will
continue. The light on the television screen will never go out. Now what
the image on that screen will be after death, after we drop the body, we
do not know. That’s the ultimate mystery” (Smith, 2007).
To philosopher-theological scholar David Bentley Hart, “reason ab-
hors a dualism, all phenomena should ideally be reducible to a single,
simpler, more capacious model of reality. So, then, rather than banish-
ing mind from our picture of nature, perhaps we should reconsider the
ancient intuition that nature and mind are not alien to one another
precisely because nature already possesses a rational structure analo-
gous to thought” (Hart, 2022b).
Not sufficiently contrarian, Hart then considers “the ground of the
possibility [that] regular physical causation is a deeper logical coin-
herence of rational relations underlying all reality.” Perhaps, more to his
point, “mind inhabits physical nature not as an anomaly, but as a
revelation of the deepest essence of everything that exists.”
16.1. Indian cosmic consciousness
Consciousness is central to the philosophical and religious traditions
that emerged on the ancient Indian subcontinent, perhaps more central
to Indian philosophy and religion than it is to any other global tradition.
The sophistication and subtleties of the millennia-long discussions on
consciousness in Indian traditions have enriched human understanding
of, and appreciation for, consciousness as core of human sentience.
All the schools of ancient Indian philosophy were concerned with
ideas about consciousness and self, which were based on the Upani-
shads, the late Vedic, sacred Sanskrit texts (800-300 BCE). Although the
motivation was often the perennial question, “How does one [Self]
overcome suffering?”, the explorations developed sophisticated philos-
ophies and subtle ontologies (Sarvapriyananda, 2020; Sarvapriyananda,
2023a).
Speaking on Closer To Truth, Swami Sarvapriyananda explains why
ancient Indian thinkers of all varieties—Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, etc.—
were so interested in consciousness. Their central quest was to overcome
suffering, he reiterates, to attain liberation of the self. “Once you do that,
you see immediately that consciousness and the self are very intimately
connected. I am obviously conscious. I am aware. And it is in my
awareness that I experience suffering, and the struggle to liberate myself
from suffering. But all of it requires consciousness. Even the search for
God requires consciousness” (Sarvapriyananda, 2023b).
Sarvapriyananda defines consciousness as “that to which everything
else appears.” So, this world, he asks, “Is it consciousness? No. Nothing
in this world is consciousness because it’s an object to you. Is this body
consciousness? No. Because it’s an object to you. Now, what about the
mind, our thoughts and emotions, which would normally be taken as
related to consciousness? By this elegant definition of consciousness as
‘that to which everything else appears,’ can you designate this thought
or this emotion subjectively from your perspective? You can. And if you
can, then even thoughts and emotions are also objects to consciousness.
The result is that consciousness is clearly distinguished from all objects.
Whatever appears to you belongs to material nature. And consciousness
is not that. Consciousness does exactly one thing. It gives you a first-
person experience” (Sarvapriyananda, 2023b). (“Consciousness” is the
usual translation of the Vedantic term “Chaitanya,” although alternative
English words, such as “awareness” and “sentience,” are also used.)
The preeminence of consciousness, both intrinsically and to the self,
elicited a wide diversity of speculation about what consciousness is, and
how it arises and functions. “Indian philosophy had different schools,
and they argued with each other fiercely. Each of the schools fashioned
its own approach to consciousness and to its relationship with self. The
range of beliefs parallels consciousness studies today, from materialist-
reductionism to idealism. Although the ancient Indian materialists
(Charvakas) were a popular school, the dominant theme of the primary
Vedanta schools, especially Advaita Vedanta, became nondual idealism,
‘nondualism’” (Sarvapriyananda, 2020). Other schools said there are
two kinds of consciousness: a personal consciousness associated with
individual bodies and minds, and a cosmic consciousness associated
with all bodies and minds. “You are the consciousness associated with
your body and mind. And God is the consciousness associated with all
bodies and minds. God is cosmic consciousness” (Sarvapriyananda,
2023b).
“But this goes further,” Swami Sarvapriyananda says. “How does
consciousness interact with material nature? There were multiple an-
swers from multiple schools. One is that material nature is real, and
consciousness is just an expression of material nature. (There were
modern materialists in ancient India!) The second school says that the
universe is produced from consciousness. And who says that? Every
theistic school in the world says that. If God is the creator God, and God
is obviously conscious, then in some sense, consciousness produces the
material universe. These are the dualists. The third school is the
Samkhyan, where consciousness and matter are parallel; neither pro-
duces the other; both are fundamental, irreducible realities.”
The fourth, Advaita Vedanta, Swami Sarvapriyananda’s own school,
is nondualist, “which means that you cannot solve the interaction
problem. If consciousness and matter are fundamentally different, then
there is no way they could interact. Where would be the place, the
boundary, where interaction could occur?” So, not being able to solve
the interaction problem, what to do? “Let’s just stick to our experience,”
he advises. “What is matter? That which appears in consciousness. And if
matter appears in consciousness, then matter can be reduced to con-
sciousness. Thus, the materialist reduces consciousness to matter, the
nondualist reduces matter to consciousness” (Sarvapriyananda, 2023b).
Advaita Vedanta, a monistic system, eradicates the dualistic di-
chotomy between consciousness and its object. Even more fundamental
than the mind is nondual pure consciousness. The term for this ultimate
consciousness is Brahman, “the vast” or “the limitless” (literally, "that
which expands into everything"), and it is the key concept that unifies
the consciousness of the individual with the consciousness of the
cosmos, which is the fundamental, nondual reality of the universe.
Rather than conceiving of prakriti/nature as a transformation of purusa/
consciousness, in Advaita Vedanta, prakriti is considered an appearance
of purusa (Sarvapriyananda, 2020).
In the succinct expression of the Mandukya, the briefest of the major
Upanishads, “Brahman is all, and the Self is Brahman.”
Thus, Advaita Vedanta’s nondualism asserts that each individual
soul, in some literal sense, is non-different from the infinite Brahman.
“You are that underlying reality, Brahman. Not you as the body; not you
as the mind; not even you as the person you think yourself to be, but as
an underlying consciousness that shines through, functions through, and
expresses itself through this body-mind complex.” Swami Vivekananda,
who introduced Vedanta to Western audiences, put it this way: “If only
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
123
you knew yourselves as you truly are.” Not as a body, bound to age,
decay, and die; not even as a mind, a changing, limited personality, but
as an unlimited consciousness expressing itself through a mind and a
body (Sarvapriyananda, 2020).
The modern Hindu sage Bhagavan Sri Ramana Maharshi clarified the
fundamental principles of Advaita Vedanta, as explained by philoso-
pher/translator Michael James, an expert on Sri Ramana. With regard to
consciousness, “Sri Ramana highlighted the distinction between transi-
tive awareness (suṭṭaṟivu in Tamil) and intransitive awareness (suṭṭaṯṟa
aṟivu). Transitive awareness is awareness that knows objects or phe-
nomena, whereas intransitive awareness is awareness that knows
nothing other than itself. In classical Advaita Vedanta, intransitive
awareness is called pure consciousness (´suddha caitanya), because it is
consciousness devoid of any content, and being-consciousness (sat-cit),
not only because it is conscious only of its own being, ‘I am’, but also
because it is the consciousness (cit) that is itself pure being (sat),
meaning that it is what alone actually exists, so it is the one real sub-
stance (vastu) from which all other things derive their seeming existence,
just as gold ornaments derive their existence from gold. Transitive
awareness, on the other hand, is called cid¯abh¯asa, meaning that it is an
¯abh¯asa (semblance, likeness or reflection) of consciousness (cit), because
it is not real consciousness, since it is consciousness of things that do not
actually exist but merely seem to exist, like all the things seen in a
dream. Only consciousness of what actually exists is real consciousness,
and since what actually exists is only pure consciousness, it alone is real
consciousness” (James, 2012, 2024).
However, according to James, “these are not two separate con-
sciousnesses, but two forms of the one and only consciousness, one form
of which is consciousness as it actually is, namely intransitive aware-
ness, and the other form of which is an unreal appearance, namely
transitive awareness. Intransitive awareness is real because it is per-
manent, unchanging, self-existent and self-shining. It is self-existent
because it exists independent of all other things, and it is self-shining
because it shines by its own light of consciousness, underived from
anything else. Transitive awareness, on the other hand, is impermanent
and constantly changing, and it is neither self-existent nor self-shining,
because it derives its seeming existence from the real existence of
intransitive awareness and it shines by the light of consciousness that it
borrows from intransitive awareness. Intransitive awareness is therefore
the reality that underlies and supports the illusory appearance of tran-
sitive awareness, just as a rope is the reality that underlies and supports
the illusory appearance of a snake. That is, we cannot be aware of
anything without being aware, but we can be aware without being
aware of anything, so intransitive awareness is primary and funda-
mental whereas transitive awareness is secondary and emergent”
(James, 2024).
Sri Ramana concluded that “transitive awareness (awareness of
anything other than ourself) is an unreal appearance, and that the only
real consciousness is pure intransitive awareness (awareness of nothing
other than our own being). That is, consciousness or awareness is not an
object but the reality of the subject, so no objective investigation can
enable us to know consciousness as it actually is. Since we ourself are
consciousness, in order to know ourself as we actually are, we need to
turn our entire attention back on ourself, away from all other things”—a
practice Sri Ramana called self-investigation (¯atma-vic¯ara), which means
“keeping our attention fixed firmly on what we actually are, namely our
fundamental awareness ‘I am’, which is our very being, so he also called
this practice ‘awareness-investigation’ (j˜n¯ana-vic¯ara)” (James, 2012,
2024).
According to artist and computer scientist Ganapathy Subramaniam,
Brahman as "Consciousness/Awareness/Self" can be compacted to “I”.
While all things can be reduced to this “I,” this “I” cannot be reduced (i.
e., the Vedanta fundamental irreducible is in the first person). So, when
Vedanta says, “I am that,” meaning “I am the fundamental,” it does not
mean that the individual person is fundamental; rather the irreducible I
is the fundamental. This leads to the declaration, "Atman is Brahman,"
meaning, "The Individual Consciousness is the same as Universal Con-
sciousness" (which is the irreducible "I") (Subramaniam, 2023).
Subramaniam states that “reincarnation and the interrelated concept
of karma are stepping stones to understand ultimate truth. Under-
standing ultimate truth is called Nirvana. It’s nothing more nothing
less.” How do the multiple reincarnations "stop" with Nirvana? he asks
rhetorically. “Nirvana means apprehending that the concept of births
and deaths is an illusion and the consciousness that you truly are, does
not get born or die. Consciousness is fundamental. and you are that. This
is the only truth, and this obviously negates reincarnation—which is the
true meaning of the statement that ‘Once you achieve Nirvana, you no
longer reincarnate.’ It’s simply a logical conclusion from the definition
of Nirvana.”
“Indian thought is layered and progressive, and as you move through
the layers you need to abandon and evolve out of the previous one,”
Subramaniam says. “Within mainstream Indian thought you have Karma
theory as well as negation of Karma theory. If you look at both at the
same time, it appears to be a contradiction. But if you look at both as a
progression, it fits in well.”
Consciousness qua consciousness is “incapable of experiences,”
Subramaniam contends, “so, only a person (or any sentient) is capable of
physical and mental experience. When you investigate who ‘you’ are,
you will logically arrive at the conclusion that ‘you’ are not the person.”
But you will still be experiencing all the events of life, accumulating
experiences, much like in a dream or a novel or a movie or a video game.
But the fact is you are not the person. Nobody is ever the person they
think they are or as they appear to be. And it all converges to the singular
consciousness” (Subramaniam, 2023).
In that Advaita Vedanta’s central teaching is “That Thou Art,” with
“That” representing God and “Thou” standing for the individual, how to
counter the charge of blasphemy, equating oneself with God? The
Advaita exculpatory answer is that when the limited personality is
transcended, the divinity within is revealed. Each soul is potentially
divine. (Reasoning in reverse, the Advaita Vedanta system claims to
prove the existence of God in that “our own existence is the existence of
God”—although the reasoning, at least superficially, has a touch of
circularity.)
Concisely, with respect to consciousness, the central paradigm of
Advaita Vedanta is that there is only one nondual reality, which is
consciousness, and it is this all-pervading cosmic consciousness that is
our individual consciousness and generates our first-person inner ex-
periences (qualia) (Sarvapriyananda, 2020).
Naturally, within Hinduism, different traditions understand the na-
ture of consciousness in different ways, but most of them do take con-
sciousness to be fundamental (Medhananda, 2023). One school follows
the tradition of Sri Ramakrishna (a 19th century mystic in India), and his
view was that while consciousness is fundamental, the one divine con-
sciousness is not just impersonal but also personal, and that everything
in the universe in reality is one and the same Divine Consciousness, even
though everything in the universe in appearance, manifests as various
and diverse forms. (This might compare to the Western metaphysics of
panentheistic cosmopsychism, according to which the sole reality is one
cosmic consciousness, which grounds all of the individual-level con-
sciousnesses.) (Medhananda, 2022).
Aphorisms give flavor.
The soul/consciousness is smaller than the smallest, larger than the
largest, and is everything everywhere all at once.
Consciousness localized is Body; globalized is Mind; universalized is
Soul; and synchronized is Life.
To understand properly Advaita Vedanta’s conception of con-
sciousness, one must introduce reincarnation, the guiding belief in most
India-based religious traditions that the soul goes through innumerable,
perhaps endless, cycles of birth-death-rebirth. Without discussing rein-
carnation as a doctrine, with its (to be expected) myriad nuances, suffice
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
124
it to say that reincarnation works to distinguish among soul, self and
consciousness. While the underlying soul may be in a sense immortal, its
consciousness is contingent on its current incarnation, with scant, if any,
awareness of its prior existences (although the karma of past lives would
influence the condition of future lives).
Relating consciousness to ultimate reality, Swami Sarvapriyananda
explains what it means that “Brahman, the ultimate reality, is limitless
existence, limitless consciousness, existence and consciousness without
limit.” Without limit, he says, “should be understood technically as no
limits in space and no limits in time, and no limits in something called
‘object limitation.’ Limit in space means it’s here and it’s not there. But
Brahman is not something that’s located in one place. It’s everywhere.
And limit in time means it does not exist earlier, it does not exist later.
But Brahman is not something that appears and disappears. It always is.
Object limitation is interesting. A table is not a chair. A horse is not a
cow. But Brahman does not have object limitation. Consciousness does
not have object limitation. There is no object which is other than con-
sciousness because they are all appearances of consciousness, in con-
sciousness,
and
ultimately,
nothing
but
consciousness
itself”
(Sarvapriyananda, 2023b).
16.2. Buddhism’s empty, illusory phenomenal consciousness
Consciousness in Buddhism is sufficiently distinct, with its concepts
of emptiness and illusion, it could command a prime category of its own
on the Landscape, yet it also fits decently in idealism, appropriately after
Hinduism. Buddhism also arose in ancient India and the legendary
philosophical disputes between Hindu and Buddhist sages enriched
both.
Buddhist discussions of consciousness feel radically different from
contemporary Western discussions, as philosopher Jay Garfield ex-
plains, yet “can be valuable sources of viable alternatives, both with
respect to positions on the topic and, more fundamentally, with respect
to how questions and debates are framed in the first place” (Garfield,
2015, pp. 135–136).
Buddhism describes nine kinds or levels of consciousness. The first
five reflect the five senses: eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose
consciousness, tongue consciousness, and body consciousness. The sixth
is mind consciousness, which integrates the five senses and provides
meaning. The seventh consciousness is directed inward, toward one’s
private thoughts and apprehends spiritual issues; it also creates the
concept of self (from which all the deception is said to come because
there is no entity ‘self’). The eighth consciousness is known as “store-
house consciousness” where all our experiences, actions and deeds, are
in some sense “stored,” accumulating a lifetime of karma. (The eighth
consciousness persists after death, unlike the first seven that cease when
the body dies.) The ninth and highest consciousness, known as the
Buddha nature, is the purest, forming the foundations for one’s life and
serving as the core of our energy and the source for all mental and
spiritual activity. It cannot be affected by any of the karmic energy from
the previous eight levels and attaining the ninth is to find peace and
ultimate fulfillment” (Yifa, 2023; The Nine Consciousness, 2022).
Garfield analyzes these nine levels of consciousness by kind. These
include: “sensory and conceptual forms of consciousness; consciousness
that is introspectible and consciousness that is too deep for introspec-
tion; consciousness that takes external phenomena as objects and con-
sciousness that takes inner phenomena as objects; consciousness that is
merely receptive and consciousness that is constructive and even pro-
jective. In general, the complex set of phenomena is opaque to casual
introspection, and are knowable only theoretically or perhaps by highly
trained meditators.” Garfield draws parallels between the nine levels
and modern theories of consciousness: reflexive models of self-con-
sciousness and self-knowledge, higher-order thought models, higher-
order perception models and self-luminosity models (Garfield, 2015).
Regarding the Buddhist approach to phenomenal consciousness, the
story is complex. On the one hand, as Garfield puts it, “There is no
phenomenal consciousness; there is nothing ‘that it is like’ to be me. To
believe in phenomenal consciousness or ‘what-it-is-like-ness’ of ‘for-me-
ness’ is to succumb to a pernicious form of the ‘Myth of the Given’.54..
the sense that there is such a kind of consciousness is an instance of
cognitive illusion … The very idea that there is an inner world of
qualitative states must be illusory” (Garfield, 2016).
On the other hand, there is rich tradition of Buddhist debate about
perceptual consciousness and representationalism: how inner percep-
tion articulates with external objects and what we can know about the
relationship. The Yog¯ac¯ara school goes for idealism, “arguing that since
direct realism is incoherent, as is representationalism, the direct and
only object of conscious experience is an inner state,” while its worthy
competitor, the Madhyamaka school, “analyzes consciousness, as they
analyze all phenomena, as a set of relations, not as an independent
phenomenon or characteristic.” In this deflationary account, “the illu-
sion that there is a special property or center of consciousness is resolved
in favor of a network of processes” (i.e., perceived object, sense organ,
sensory system, conceptual system) (Garfield, 2016).
From the Madhyamaka perspective, all that we lose is “the illusion
that there is more in conscious experience than the psychology and
physiology of experience. In particular, reference to internal represen-
tations, qualia, phenomenal properties and other such ghostly mediators
of our experience drop away.” Garfield argues that such a more natu-
ralistic, more public (less private) view “forces the theorist who takes
something like the qualitative character of experience to be real, and to
be essential to consciousness, to defend and not to presuppose that view”
(Garfield, 2016).
To go deeper into Buddhist consciousness is to go “empty.” Empti-
ness is a foundational concept in Buddhism and is easily misunderstood
(and inappropriately ridiculed). Simply put, “Emptiness is the lack of
any intrinsic nature, not another intrinsic nature instead of those we
naively superimpose on entities.” Emptiness, Garfield stresses, is never
“emptiness of existence” but rather “always emptiness of some more
determinate metaphysical property.” As Garfield explains the doctrine
of the “two truths,” illuminating N¯ag¯arjuna (c.150 - c.250 CE), perhaps
Buddhism’s greatest philosopher-saint (other than the Buddha, of
course), “nothing turns out to be ultimately real, everything is merely
conventionally real, and the ultimate and conventional truths, while
radically different in one respect, are in fact identical in another. That is
the profound doctrine of the emptiness of emptiness” (Garfield, 2016).
Applied to consciousness, if phenomenal consciousness, like every-
thing else, is empty of intrinsic nature, its claim of qualitative distinction
from all other phenomena, its claim of radical subjective experience as a
nonpareil occurrence in the cosmos, would seem to weaken. Moreover,
though debate abounds, whereas Madhyamaka “takes all phenomena,
including mind and the external world, to be conventionally real but
ultimately empty, and to be interdependent, Yog¯ac¯ara takes external
objects to be mere appearances to mind, to be utterly non-existent, and
takes mind to be the substantially real subjective substrate of those
representations,” confirming the Yog¯ac¯ara position as idealist (Garfield,
2015).
That Buddhism rejects the self, asserting that we are persons, not
selves, makes for fascinating explorations (Garfield, 2022). Debate has
continued whether the Buddhist “Atman,” often translated self or soul, is
permanent and unchanging, a position that Buddhist traditions and texts
largely reject. No matter. The nature of the Buddhist non-self (or self) or
the Buddhist person does not seem to much affect the deflationary na-
ture of Buddhist consciousness. Self, non-self, person—phenomenal
consciousness is the same empty illusion.
54 “The Myth of the Given is the myth that there is some level of our experi-
ence that is immediate, immune from error, given to us, as opposed to con-
structed, and that this level of experience constitutes the foundation or
transcendental condition of the possibility of knowledge of anything else”
(Garfield, 2016).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
125
16.3. Dao De Jing’s constant dao
Among my favorite lines in all philosophical literature are the
deceptively simple opening lines of the Dao De Jing, the Chinese classic
text that is the foundation of Daoism. “The Dao [Ultimate Reality, Way]
that can be spoken of [expressed] is not the Constant [Eternal] Dao; the
Name that can be named [understood] is not the Constant [Eternal]
Name” (道可道非常道; 名可名非常名). “Dao” (道) refers to “Ultimate
Reality” but also means “Way” or “Path.” “Constant” comes from
“Chang” (常), which also means “invariable” and may connote “eternal.”
“Name” comes from “Ming” (名), which also means “to name,” and as a
homophone of the character “Ming” (明), may connote “to understand.”
The verses are nuanced, even vague, perhaps deliberately so, allowing
high variance in interpretive translation. The core sense, however,
seems to be that whatever you think the Dao may be, it is not that, and
whatever you think the Name may be, it also is not that.
Sinologist and translator Joseph Pratt says it’s hard to read those first
lines and not think that the Dao is the source and manifestation of
conscious experience or awareness and not think that the Name is the
related cognition or thoughts. Supporting evidence comes from the Dao
De Jing’s Chapter 42 cosmogenic process: “The Dao begets the One, the
One begets the Two, the Two begets the Three, the Three begets the Ten
Thousand Things” (which includes human beings) (Pratt, 2020).
In short, the Dao (or Consciousness) and the Name (or Cognition) are
both “Constant” or “Eternal” (常), giving rise to the YinYang of Con-
sciousness and Cognition and eventually to the individual phenomeno-
logical dynamic of Consciousness, including Cognition and Form/
Thinghood. So, in this ancient text, according to Pratt, consciousness is
really the first thing and the last thing.
Moreover, the Zhuangzi, the other of Daoism’s main founding texts,
refers frequently to the ideal of a flow state, including in the context of
armed combat. Though sometimes considered to be an “unconscious” or
“less conscious” condition, from the Daoist perspective a flow state is a
deeper state of consciousness. Both the Zhuangzi and the Dao De Jing
could be considered guides for cultivating such a condition (Pratt, 2020,
2023).
Personally, my long interest in the Dao De Jing’s opening verses is
rooted in my long interest in Nothing, the metaphysics/ontology of
Leibniz’s haunting question, “Why is there Something rather than
Nothing?” “Why is there anything at all?” In my essay, “Levels of
Nothing,” I pose nine levels of increasing Nothingness (or decreasing
Somethingness). If consciousness is not fundamental, it would disappear
at the most simplistic level of Nothing, Nothing Level 1. If consciousness
is fundamental, it wouldn’t disappear until Nothing Level 7 (Kuhn,
2013).
16.4. Kastrup’s analytic idealism
Philosopher Bernardo Kastrup’s “analytic idealism” is “a conscious-
ness-only ontology” that has refocused attention, within the philo-
sophical community and more broadly, on metaphysical idealism, that
is, an idealism that is grounded in philosophical argument as opposed to
promoted by religious tradition or spiritual belief. Kastrup’s modern,
analytic version of the ontology of idealism asserts “(a) phenomenal
consciousness, as an ontological category, is fundamental; and (b)
everything else in nature can ultimately be reduced to, or grounded in,
patterns of excitation of phenomenal consciousness.” (Kastrup, 2019).
Thus, he proposes “there is only cosmic consciousness” (Kastrup, 2018),
in that “spatially unbound consciousness is posited to be nature’s sole
ontological primitive” (Kastrup, 2017).
In Kastrup’s idealism, human beings, along with all other living or-
ganisms, are but “dissociated alters of cosmic consciousness” (Kastrup,
2018), that are “surrounded like islands by the ocean of its mentation.”
The inanimate universe we see around us, he says, is “the extrinsic view
of thoughts and emotions in universal consciousness. The living crea-
tures we share the world with are the extrinsic views of other dissociated
alters of universal consciousness. A physical world independent of
consciousness is a mistaken intellectual abstraction” (Kastrup, 2016a,b)
Evidence that consciousness is not reductionist-materialist, Kastrup
argues, comes from, among others, neuroimaging of brains in altered
states induced by psychedelic substances. That these “unfathomably rich
experiential states” correlate with significantly reduced activity in
multiple brain areas is said to “contradict the mainstream metaphysics
of physicalism for obvious reasons: experience is supposed to be
generated by metabolic neuronal activity.” He dismisses “the best
physicalist hypothesis to explain psychedelic experiences” based on the
idea that psychotomimetic drugs cause brain desynchronization, pro-
cesses labeled “brain entropy,” “complexity,” “diversity”—which
Kastrup interprets as “very straightforward: brain noise.” The “entropic
brain hypothesis” (9.5.6), Kastrup says, is “a linguistic charade,” leaving
mainstream physicalism unsupported as a viable metaphysics of mind
(Kastrup, 2023). (Neuropsychopharmacologist David Nutt contends that
“we don’t need to adopt an untestable metaphysical worldview to
explain the subjective richness of psychedelic experiences” and that
neuroscience and neuroimaging research have resources to develop
complete theories—for example, chaotic cortical entropy may “release
the usual brake” that the cortex holds on sub-cortical structures, espe-
cially the emotion centers, liberating the amygdala and hippocampus
from “top-down” inhibitory control [Nutt, 2023]. Kastrup counters that
such disinhibition, if it were the case, should itself correspond to
increased brain activity somewhere in the brain, which is not what is
observed.)
How to explain, under idealism, the correlation between inner
experience and brain states? According to Kastrup, “the brain and its
patterns of neuronal activity are not the cause of inner experience, but
the image, the extrinsic appearance of inner experience. In other words,
brain activity is what inner experience looks like when observed from the
outside.” As such, he says, “the correlations ordinarily observed between
patterns of brain activity and inner experience are due to the trivial fact
that the appearance of a phenomenon correlates with the phenomenon.”
And when this correlation is broken, as observed in the psychedelic
state, the reason is that, “unlike a cause, the appearance of a phenomenon
doesn’t need to be always complete”—it can leave out much about the
phenomenon it is an appearance of (Kastrup, 2023).
Kastrup maintains that idealism’s key challenge is “to explain how
the seemingly distinct phenomenal inner lives of different subjects of
experience can arise within this fundamentally unitary phenomenal
field.” This is called the “decomposition problem” and it is the core
problem Kastrup needs to address. Other challenges include: “how to
reconcile idealism with the fact that we all inhabit a common external
world; why this world unfolds independently of our personal volition or
imagination; why there are such tight correlations between measured
patterns of brain activity and reports of experience” (Kastrup, 2019).
Kastrup’s unabashed challenge to his metaphysical competitors is
that an idealist ontology “makes sense of reality in a more parsimonious
and empirically rigorous manner than mainstream physicalism, bottom-
up panpsychism, and cosmopsychism” (Kastrup, 2018). He argues that
an idealist ontology “offers more explanatory power than these three
alternatives, in that it does not fall prey to the hard problem of con-
sciousness, the combination problem, or the decombination problem,
respectively.” (Panpsychists seem to be taking the challenge more seri-
ously than do physicalists55 [Kastrup, 2020b; Goff, 2020].)
Given his consciousness-only ontology, Kastrup explores what might
follow in two areas of high interest and continuing controversy: foun-
dations of quantum mechanics and prospects for life after death.
Regarding quantum mechanics, he stresses the centrality of con-
sciousness, making the startling but perhaps coherent argument that
“the dynamics of all inanimate matter in the universe correspond to
55 See the energetic, illuminating debate between idealist Bernardo Kastrup
and panpsychist Philip Goff (Kastrup, 2020b; Goff, 2020).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
126
transpersonal mentation, just as an individual’s brain activity—which is
also made of matter—corresponds to personal mentation” (Kastrup
et al., 2018).
Regarding life after death, Kastrup speculates that “the implication is
that, instead of disappearing, conscious inner life expands upon bodily
death, a prediction that finds circumstantial but [claimed] significant
confirmation in reports of near-death experiences and psychedelic
trances, both of which can be construed as glimpses into the early stages
of the death process” (Kastrup, 2016a,b).
Say this for Kastrup’s analytic idealism: it expands and enlivens the
consciousness debate.
16.5. Hoffman’s conscious realism: the case against reality
Cognitive psychologist Donald Hoffman’s “Case Against Reality”
argues that our visual perceptions are not veridical of ultimate reality
because evolution selects for fitness to reproduce, not for access to
ontological truth (Hoffman, 2019a). “This is consistent with the inter-
face theory of perception, which claims that natural selection shapes
perceptual systems not to provide veridical perceptions, but to serve as
species-specific interfaces that guide adaptive behavior” (Prakash et al.,
2020).
Hoffman likens our perceptions of objects around us to “interfaces”
constructed by natural selection, taking as analogy the file icons on our
computer screens, which may look like little paper folders but are in
truth written in the complex binary code of machine language. Simi-
larly, he says, evolution has shaped our perceptions, not as true de-
pictions of an animal-independent world, but rather as simplistic
illusions to help us navigate the world around us (Hoffman, 2019a).
Continuing his computer-screen interface analogy, he says, “The
pixels are in the screen, still part of the desktop interface. Similarly, tiny
nuclei and electrons are in spacetime, still part of our spacetime inter-
face.” But “spacetime is not objective reality and does not resemble re-
ality, whatever reality might be” (Hoffman, 2019b).
Hoffman’s ultimate ontology is what he calls “conscious realism,”
which states that the objective world consists of conscious agents and
their experiences. This means, fundamentally, that instead of assuming
that “particles in spacetime are fundamental, and somehow create
consciousness when they form neurons and brains,” he proposes the
reverse: “consciousness is fundamental, and it creates spacetime and
objects.” He posits a mathematical theory of consciousness that “reality
is a vast social network of interacting ‘conscious agents,’ in which each
agent has a range of possible experiences, and each agent can act to
influence the experiences of other agents.”
What follows for Hoffman is that “no object within spacetime is itself
a conscious agent; spacetime is simply a format for conscious experi-
ences—an interface—employed by agents like us, and physical objects
are just icons in that interface” (Hoffman, 2019b).
Remarkably, Hoffman reverses the arrow of causation for the
abundance of experimental evidence correlating mental states of the
mind with physical states of the brain. These correlations arise, he states,
“because consciousness creates brain activity and indeed creates all
objects and properties of the physical world” (Hoffman, 2008).
Hoffman is clear: “Consciousness is fundamental in the universe. It is
not a product of space and time or anything inside space and time. I
think that efforts to derive consciousness from spacetime, either by
identity theories or causal theories, have proven ineffective, and I’ve
been forced to take the view that consciousness is actually fundamental
in the universe” (Hoffman, 2013).
16.6. McGilchrist’s relational, creative-process idealism
Psychiatrist, neuroscientist, and literary scholar Iain McGilchrist’s
idealist metaphysics has consciousness as “irreducible, primordial and
omnipresent.” But consciousness is “not a thing; it is a creative process,”
he says. “All that exists, exists in consciousness … consciousness is the
stuff of the cosmos.” Moreover, given “that consciousness is ‘the
fundamental given natural fact’, it clearly follows that it cannot be
reduced to something more fundamental” (McGilchrist, 2021b, 2021a,
p. 1601).
Matter, to McGilchrist, is “a theoretical abstraction that no one has
seen.” The term clearly has meaning, he clarifies; “it refers to the qual-
ities of certain elements within consciousness which offer relative
resistance and relative permanence as a necessary part of that creative
process” (McGilchrist, 2021b). Matter is also critical for individuality to
arise.
Put another way, McGilchrist has matter as “a special case, or a phase
of consciousness.” Matter is not a separate thing, he says, any more than
ice is separate from water; it’s a phase of water; it’s neither less nor more
than water; it’s not separate from water; it’s a kind of water. And matter
is a kind of consciousness—for a time—that has certain quite marked
properties that are different from the way we normally think of con-
sciousness, just as water is transparent and flows and all the rest, and ice
is hard and opaque and can split your head open. So they’re different but
they’re part of the same ontology.” McGilchrist stresses that “con-
sciousness and matter must be distinguished”—but “there should be no
need to set the one against the other.”
McGilchrist’s consciousness turns on its relational nature. He holds
that “everything is relational, and that what we call things, the relata,
are secondary to relationship.” Consciousness, he argues, is always “of”
something, then he asks: “what is the nature then of that something that
is both in part constitutive of, and in part constituted by, that
relationship?”
A consequence, counterintuitive to most, is that while some scientists
consider a “Reality Out There” to be independent of any consciousness
whatsoever—naïve realism—McGilchrist says, “In reality, we partici-
pate in the knowing: there is no ‘view from nowhere’” (McGilchrist,
2021b).
Given that McGilchrist has consciousness as primordial and matter as
a phase of consciousness, how does he have the relationship between the
brain and consciousness? He says, “I do not suggest that the brain
originates anything. I do not know that the brain ‘causes’ consciousness:
it might or might not.” He goes on to note, rightly, “I know of no way of
proving the point one way or the other, since the observable facts would
look the same whether it [the brain] gave rise to, or simply mediated,
consciousness.” In other words, the same findings are equally compat-
ible with the brain emitting consciousness, transmitting consciousness, or
permitting consciousness. (The latter two options are similar, except that
permitting substitutes the idea of a constraint that is creative, fashioning
what it allows to come into being, replacing the merely passive idea of
transmitting.)” McGilchrist argues that “it is the last of these possibilities
– permitting – that is the most convincing” (McGilchrist, 2021a, pp. 55,
1592).
Logically, McGilchrist’s ontology would skew to the brain alone not
causing consciousness and his medical training would skew to the brain
not being a mere passive receiver of consciousness. His solution seems to
be something like this: the brain structures, shapes and physically ac-
tualizes the consciousness we experience so that it can be expressed and
felt by a body.
It’s worth noting that McGilchrist’s consciousness-matter ontology
has a kind of relationship to his hemisphere hypothesis, which states
that the brain’s “two hemispheres have evolved so as to attend to the
world, and therefore bring into being the only world we can know, in two
largely opposing ways: the left hemisphere paying narrowly targeted
attention to a detail that we need to manipulate; the right hemisphere
paying broad, open, sustained, vigilant, uncommitted attention to the
rest of the world while we focus on our desired detail” (McGilchrist,
2009, 2021a).
This means, he argues, that “each hemisphere brings into being a
world that has different qualities … In the case of the left hemisphere, a
world of things that are familiar, certain, fixed, isolated, explicit,
abstracted from context, disembodied, general in nature, quantifiable,
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
127
known by their parts, and inanimate. In the case of the right hemisphere,
a world of Gestalten, forms and processes that are never reducible to the
already known or certain, never accounted for by dissolution into parts,
but always understood as wholes that both incorporate and are incor-
porated into other wholes, unique, always changing and flowing,
interconnected, implicit, understood only in context, embodied and
animate” (McGilchrist, 2009, 2021a).
Most importantly, the world of the right hemisphere is the world that
presences to us, that of the left hemisphere a re-presentation: the left
hemisphere a map, the right hemisphere the world of experience that is
mapped.” To McGilchrist, loosely associating the right hemisphere with
consciousness and the left hemisphere with matter may be more than
metaphor.
Finally, McGilchrist sees “the cosmos as fundamentally relational,
and the ground of Being as driven to come to know itself in and through
creating an evolving cosmos. The ground of Being and the cosmos
respond to each other. (So far this is in keeping with Whitehead.) What
life does is to increase by untold orders of magnitude the responsiveness
of that cosmos. I, like Nagel, see that ‘value is not just an accidental side-
effect of life; rather, there is life because life is a necessary condition of
value.’” What life brings, McGilchrist maintains, “is not consciousness,
then—which, as I have argued, is present from the beginning—but the
coming into being of the capacity for value: thus, a mountain cannot
value, though it can have value for creatures, like ourselves, who value.
And it is not just we, but all living creatures, that for the first time are
able to recognize value. Life vastly enhances the degree of responsive-
ness of, to and within the world.” Indeed, “life could be seen as the very
process of the cosmic consciousness continually both discovering and
furthering its beauty, truth, and goodness; both contemplating and (not
separately but in the same indivisible act) further bringing them into
being: a process” (McGilchrist, 2021a, pp. 1722, 1723).
Yet, the grounding of consciousness is not deterministic, McGilchrist
says. It has none of the characteristics of being pre-programmed by “an
omnipotent and omniscient engineering God constructing and winding
up a mechanism. It is in the process of discovering itself through its
creative potential (one thing we all know directly from our own expe-
rience is that consciousness is endlessly creative)” (McGilchrist, 2021a).
The cosmos has purpose, McGilchrist says. “It has direction, but not
direction of the hydraulic kind, being pushed blindly from behind,
rather of the kind that is drawn from in front, by attractors that call it
ever forward” (McGilchrist, personal communication).
16.7. Chopra’s only the whole is conscious
Holistic physician Deepak Chopra defines consciousness as “It is
what makes experience possible. It is what makes perception possible. It
is what makes cognition possible. Everything we call reality, con-
sciousness makes possible. Consciousness is the ultimate reality” (Cho-
pra, 2013).
To Chopra, progress in cognitive neuroscience, such as brain scans
that translate electrical patterns in the brain into real words in synthe-
sized speech, are “false clues,” like tracking a fox in the snow only to find
that the tracks have led you in a circle. “This looks like progress,” he
says, “and yet the progress is built up from false clues, for the same
reason that pertains to circular tracks in the snow. It is physically
impossible for brain cells to create the human mind. Brain cells are
composed of the same basic organic chemicals as any other cell in the
body, and organic chemicals can’t think. It doesn’t matter how many
billions of neurons the human brain contains, or the quadrillions of
synaptic connections between them. Complexity doesn’t get around the
simple impossibility that chemicals aren’t conscious, and the brain is
nothing but chemicals. The presence of electrical activity in the brain is
also a false clue, because electricity can’t think, either” (Chopra, 2023a,
b). “If you want to understand consciousness, then the last thing you
want to be is a neuroscientist,” Chopra half-jokes, referring to my/RLK
background. “Because neuroscience doesn’t give you a clue” (Chopra,
2013).
Chopra’s persistent claim is that there is only one way to get past
every false clue in the hunt for consciousness. “You must make it the
‘stuff’ of creation, a non-physical state from which matter, energy, time,
and space are created. It is not, he says, that every phenomenon we can
experience has consciousness or exhibits mind. It is that consciousness
shapes itself into every mode of knowing and experiencing reality.” In
other words, Chopra says, “the ‘hard problem’ isn’t a problem at all.
Consciousness, being our source and origin, explains everything by it-
self, needing no outside explanation” (Chopra, 2013).
According to Chopra, taking idealism to its logical extreme—some
say to its simplest condition—what’s conscious is only the whole, not the
parts like us. The entirety of reality, the fullness of the cosmos, a mul-
tiverse of innumerable universes (if there are such), everything every-
where all together, is the expression of a unitary consciousness.
In their essay, “Why You Aren’t Conscious and Never Have Been,”
Chopra and physicist Menas Kafatos, after rejecting both materialism
and panpsychism, seek to explain consciousness not by trying to figure
out how individuals are conscious, which they claim is doomed to fail-
ure, but rather by assuming that all reality is conscious and individual
instances of consciousness are conscious only with respect to their being
part of the whole. “When you arrive at the conclusion that nothing
material is conscious, bizarre as this sounds, you make a tremendous
breakthrough. ‘I am conscious’ misstates the reality, which is ‘I am
consciousness itself’” (Chopra and Kafatos, 2023).
“The way that humans are conscious is what matters,” the authors
write. “Consciousness is everywhere all the time embracing past, present
and future. I am part of that reality. Therefore, I am consciousness itself.
Who I really am is beyond time.”
Nothing can be conscious on its own, Chopra and Kafatos claim; the
only way to be conscious is to be part of the “All and One.” As for where
the All-and-One Consciousness comes from or came from, the answer is
the same as to “Who made God?” “Our origin story begins with absolute,
pure awareness, which has no explanation. It simply is” (Chopra and
Kafatos, 2023).
16.8. How consciousness becomes the physical universe
Idealism works well as an explanation of creature consciousness,
provided, of course, that one accepts its foundational premise that
consciousness, and consciousness alone, is fundamental reality. One
challenge for idealism is coming to consider what seems to be an odd,
perhaps outlandish, idea so alien to our life experiences: If all is con-
sciousness, how does the physical world come about?
The claim is made that quantum theory, which, unlike classical
physics, assigns (in some interpretations) a fundamental role to the act
of observation, can bridge the explanatory gap between idealism as
foundational reality and the physical world as empirically apparent. Can
quantum theory, as its adherents believe, open the door “to a profoundly
new vision of the cosmos, where observer, observed, and the act of
observation are interlocked,” thus hinting “at a science of wholeness,
going beyond the purely physical emphasis of current science?” Ad-
herents look to developments in the intersection of quantum theory,
biology, neuroscience and the philosophy of mind. Non-local in-
teractions of the quantum universe are cited as evidence of the inter-
connectedness of everything, supporting the idea that “consciousness
and matter are not fundamentally distinct, but rather are two comple-
mentary aspects of one reality, embracing the micro and macro worlds,”
ultimately founded on consciousness as the ultimate reality (Kafatos
et al., 2011).
There are elaborate theories that claim to explain how consciousness,
once assumed to be fundamental in nature and reality, generates or
interacts with matter and energy and interfaces with the brain. In one
version, developed by computer science professional Mahendra
Samarawickrama, consciousness governs causation and creates energy
and matter. The interplay of consciousness, matter and energy
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
128
underpins what we experience and observe in reality (Consciousness
Studies, Australia, 2024). Consciousness itself is “a high-speed sequen-
tial process that leads to awareness” (notwithstanding the brain’s
massive parallel-processing capability). “Like time, consciousness is also
subjected to relativity. When the observer is moving, both time and
consciousness dilate.” Further, “the electromagnetic energy of con-
sciousness follows quantum principles and wave-particle duality …. This
interplay of consciousness with matter and energy makes consciousness
and reality interrelate and follows determinism, realism, and physi-
calism” (Samarawickrama, 2023).
No surprise that none of this is taken seriously by a large majority of
quantum physicists (Rovelli, 2022) (11.16).
16.9. Goswami’s self-aware universe
Quantum physicist Amit Goswami proposes that consciousness, not
matter, is the primary “stuff” of creation, and indeed it is consciousness
that creates the material world, not the other way around. He uses
quantum physics, particularly the Copenhagen interpretation (where an
“observer” is required for the collapse of the wave function), to disabuse
us of the false notion that matter is simple, solid and foundational.
Consciousness, he says, “is the agency that collapses the wave of a
quantum object, which exists in potentia, making it an immanent par-
ticle in the world of manifestation” (Goswami, 1993; Woronko, 2020).
Goswami sees Idealism as not only the most parsimonious theory of
consciousness but also mitigating and perhaps solving the famous par-
adoxes of quantum mechanics, such as entanglement, superposition and
non-locality.
The key, Goswami offers, is that there is only one consciousness in
the universe, one subject of experience, in which we all (somehow)
participate. The ego, he says “is constricted consciousness, much like a
localized object. You cannot understand consciousness without experi-
encing expanded states of consciousness.”
Consciousness, according to Goswami, plays an active role in con-
structing physical reality by “choosing” the results of a measurement. He
views our mental activities, our thoughts and feelings, as “mental ob-
jects” in a sense similar to material objects, subject to the same laws of
physics, particularly quantum mechanics. Thus, Goswami envisions the
brain, not simply as a passive measuring device that intervenes in the
quantum world, but more significantly as an active quantum system that
selects and determines which unconscious processes become conscious.
Goswami concludes that all creation is interconnected, including us
(Goswami, 1993).
16.10. Spira’s non-duality
Spiritual teacher (and pottery artist) Rupert Spira espouses non-
duality as “the recognition that underlying the multiplicity and diversity
of experience there is a single, infinite and indivisible reality, whose
nature is pure consciousness from which all objects and selves derive
their apparently independent existence.” He states, “The greatest dis-
covery in life is that our essential nature does not share the limits or the
destiny of the body and mind” (Section: Spira, n.d.).
To Spira, a non-dual understanding addresses two essential ques-
tions: one, “How may we be free of suffering and find the lasting peace
and happiness for which all people long above all else?”, and two, “What
is the nature of reality?” While the first is most meaningful to individuals
and to the global community, only the second is relevant for this
Landscape.
Spira begins his non-dual teaching with an investigation into the
essential nature of our self, and it is this “clear knowledge of oneself,” he
says, that is also the basis of the second aspect of the non-dual under-
standing, “namely, the recognition that reality is an infinite, indivisible
whole, made of pure consciousness, from which all separate objects and
selves borrow their apparently independent existence.” Everything we
know or experience, he states, “is mediated through the mind, and
therefore, the mind’s knowledge of anything can only ever be as good as
its knowledge of itself. In order to know what anything truly is—that is,
what reality truly is—the mind must first know its own essential nature.
Therefore, the investigation into the nature of the mind must be the
highest endeavor upon which any mind can embark, and the knowledge
of its essence or nature the highest knowledge.”
Spira suggests that approaching non-duality as a means of finding an
answer to the ultimate question about the nature of reality “is found at
the heart of all the great religious and spiritual traditions.” For instance,
“In Christianity, it is said, ‘I and my Father are one’. That is, the essence
of our self and the ultimate reality of the universe are the same.” Simi-
larly, “in the Sufi tradition, ‘Whosoever knows their self knows their
Lord’. That is, whoever knows the essential nature of their self knows the
ultimate reality of the universe.” And “in Buddhism, ‘Samsara and
Nirvana are one’, meaning the nature of the world and the essence of the
mind are identical” (Spira, n.d.).
16.11. Nader’s all there is
Transcendental Meditation leader (and former neuroscientist) Tony
Nader states “there is nothing other than consciousness, and that matter
and the multiplicity of loci of consciousness, us, for one, are nothing but
consciousness experiencing itself from limited perspectives that hide the
true nature of both the observer and the observed.” In a world of an
infinite number of simultaneously existing possibilities, Nader says “one
fact seems undeniable: the fact of our own awareness … Commonly, this
awareness is called consciousness: the observer, the witness, the expe-
riencer” (Nader, n.d.).
Nader states formally, “Consciousness is all there is and does not
create anything physical outside itself; matter is real only in terms of
consciousness or as an appearance within consciousness.” While “Con-
sciousness is all there is” and “Consciousness is One” are his foundation,
Nader acknowledges that “there are different kinds of consciousness:
different flavors, states, levels, and so on. The only way for these two
statements to be simultaneously true, he says, is that the one Con-
sciousness has different flavors, states, and experiences of itself” (Nader,
2015).
While acknowledging that other Idealism theorists suggest similar,
Nader differentiates his approach by providing “a carefully constructed
and cogent model for how those limited perspectives in all their sub-
jective richness emerge within the singularity of consciousness.” He
claims “a monistic field theory of consciousness” as the most primordial
field, which then can “potentially solve enduring problems in other
fields, including quantum field theory and the psychology of higher
states of consciousness” (Nader, n.d.).
Nader’s distinguishing proposal is to place consciousness “in a
mathematical framework by introducing fundamental axioms that are
motivated by the experience and dynamics of consciousness.” By sys-
tematizing how human awareness perceives, discriminates, organizes,
and expresses its own patterns of functioning, mathematical methods
and mathematical modeling provide “one of the most useful and scien-
tifically manageable methods to study the interface between con-
sciousness and physical phenomena.” Mathematics is seen as “the
precise abstract representation of consciousness at work.”
Nader claims “to test the reasonableness of these axioms in two ways:
by deriving consequences from the axioms and comparing these con-
sequences to our experience of the world, and by verifying that here-
tofore unsolved problems can be resolved with this new paradigm.” In
particular, he ambitiously addresses how the physical universe emerges
from consciousness.
Nader introduces “the notion of a Bit of Consciousness as a triple of
particular values of Observerhood, Observinghood, and Observedhood,”
with the understanding that “nothing can be said to be real unless it is a
triple with none of its components equal to 0. In other words, real ex-
istence requires an observer, a process of observation, and an observed”
(Nader, 2015).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
129
In Nader’s consciousness model, it is not non-localized or localized
objects that are the issue. Rather, it is the idea of the very existence of
objects as entities independent of Consciousness that is the root of the
problem. In his model, nothing exists outside the realm of observer,
observed, and process of observation (Nader, 2015).
16.12. Ward’s personal idealism: souls as embodied agents created by
God
Philosopher-theologian Keith Ward’s “personal idealism” integrates
his philosophical convictions about consciousness and souls, idealism in
Eastern traditions, and his Christian faith (Ward, 2022). It’s a heady
brew.
Ward describes souls as “the embodied agents which are created by
God.” To build his case, he cites the “huge gap in modern culture be-
tween neurophysiologists and old-fashioned philosophers” (musing,
“We thought we were very trendy in our time”). It’s a fundamental,
philosophical divide, he says, and from his perspective, he begins from
consciousness, puts consciousness first, because “this is where all
knowledge starts … your starting point is perception, a set of percep-
tions, a set of concepts. And from that, you build up a picture of what the
world is like” (Ward, 2006).
Ward stresses “you can never get rid of consciousness.” He is firm:
“From where I sit, I can just say whatever view you come up with,
consciousness is not reducible to particles which are publicly observable
in space and time.” He is adamant: “I will just not give way on
this—because it seems to me so obvious; I don’t see how anyone can
deny it.” Responding to questions about the putative illusion of
conscious unity, Ward is dismissive (politely): “You’re inventing a
problem.”
Ward’s idealism surfaces when contrasting dualism. His claim, even
for explaining Descartes, is not that mind and body/brain are separate
substances that must somehow interact, but rather are subject and ob-
ject, the thinker and perceiver as the subject who is aware of its per-
ceptions and which is engaged in having its thoughts. “What you’ve got
is a subject thinking. The subject is not a different substance.”
Ward then rationalizes his idealism. “The whole world is actually a
construct with perceptions and feelings and thoughts. But the agent who
is having these perceptions, the perceiver, the thinker, is not another
thing somewhere. So, subjects and objects are always together. There’s
no subject without an object. There’s no mind without some objectivity,
some environment in which it’s embodied. That’s why I see embodiment
as an essential part of mentality, and of being a person. When you’re
talking about the mind, you’re talking about a subject, an embodied
subject, who nevertheless is not to be identified simply by physical facts
which are publicly observable. I think that’s what the soul is: An
embodied subject of intellectual and moral agency” (Ward, 2006).
16.13. Albahari’s perennial idealism
Comparative philosopher Miri Albahari defends “Perennial Idealism”
as a mystical solution to the mind-body problem. She faces the “vicious
dilemma” of subjects arising from unconditioned consciousness. “If the
manifest world of subjects is real, it irrevocably undercuts the purely
unconditioned nature of the ground by imposing boundaries between
subjects and the ground. If only the ground is real, we have the seem-
ingly absurd consequence of denying reality to what seems undeniably
existent.” She finds resources in the modern mystic, Sri Ramana
Maharshi, who was recorded as saying, “Nothing exists except the one
reality … The one unity alone exists ever. To such as find it difficult to
grasp this truth and who ask, ‘How can we ignore this solid world we see
all around us?’ the dream experience is pointed out and they are told,
‘All that you see depends on the seer. Apart from the seer, there is no
seen.’” (Ramana is expressing what is known in Advaita Vedanta as the
aj¯ata doctrine, which means “not created, not caused”.) (Albahari,
2019a).
Albahari takes as evidence “first-person accounts from people who
claim to have experienced and indeed permanently established them-
selves in aperspectival or nondual consciousness,” mystics from across
traditions and centuries who came to believe that they “have directly
‘awoken’ to their abiding nature as aperspectival consciousness, real-
izing it to be none other than the ultimate ground of what we take to be
the world.” The “central metaphysical content of this allegedly recurring
insight” has been termed by Aldous Huxley and others, “Perennial
Philosophy” (Huxley, 1946), from which Albahari’s “Perennial
Idealism” denotes its philosophical parentage (Albahari, 2019a).
Albahari posits her Perennial Idealism as “a radical new successor to
Cosmopsychism,” which, erroneously, she argues, “takes the entire
externally specified cosmos to be an internally conscious subject” (13.3).
This brings “serious troubles for Cosmopsychism,” which not only
“typically casts the entire cosmos as a conscious subject” but also “in
turn grounds the consciousness of subjects such as ourselves” (Albahari,
2019b). The most promising way forward in the mind-body problem,
she argues “is to renounce the pervasive panpsychist supposition that
fundamental consciousness must belong to a subject. This extends the
reach and scope of consciousness to ground not merely to the inner
nature of the cosmos, but everything we take to be the world, with its
subjects and objects” (Albahari, 2019a). This, Albahari concludes, “of-
fers a framework for thinking about how the world could be grounded in
a universal consciousness which, following Advaita Vedanta and the
‘Perennial Philosophy’, is not structured by subject or object” (Albahari,
2019b).
16.14. Meijer’s universal knowledge field
Biomedical scientist Dirk K. F. Meijer explains consciousness in the
context of a “Universal Knowledge Field” (UKF), the concept that a
collective storage of all information that is present and/or evolves in our
universe can take a universal character and that all information is pre-
sent in a general knowledge field. Other names for the UKF, he says,
include Universal Consciousness, Cosmic Consciousness, Universal
Mind, Universal Memory, Universal Intelligence, Holographic Memory,
Collective Consciousness, Implicate Order and the Plenum. The UKF is
said to be consistent with fundamental physics, cosmological and ho-
lographic models. In addition, universal consciousness can be
approached from transcendental human experience, including trans-
personal and psi phenomena (Meijer, 2018).
Meijer claims that integral information processing in the universe is
based on a generalized musical-scale of discrete electromagnetic field
(EMF) frequencies and that the biophysics literature reports the effects
of similar EMF frequency patterns in a wide range of animate and non-
animate systems. This provides a conceptual bridge between living and
non-living systems, relevant for biophysics, brain research, and biolog-
ical evolution. He proposes that the pro-life EMF frequency bands may
literally act in concert as a “tonal octave-based symphony” to provide
living systems, including the brain, with information embedded in such
harmonic-like resonance patterns. Such “tonal” projections, in a global
manner, may organize synchronicity, both spatially and temporally in
essential organs in the body: heart and brain (Meijer et al, 2020, pp.
1–31).
Thus, if nature is guided by “a discrete pattern of harmonic solitonic
waves,” since the whole human organism, including brain, is embedded
in this dynamic energy field, a comprehensive model for human (self-)
consciousness could be conceived. This implies an intrinsic cosmic
connectivity that is mirrored in the human brain. An assumed “hydro-
dynamic superfluid background field” is proposed to guide the ongoing
fabric of reality through a “quantum metalanguage” that is instrumental
in the manifestation of universal consciousness, of which human con-
sciousness is an integral part (Meijer et al, 2020, pp. 72–107).
Meijer proposes a “pilot-wave-guided supervenience” of brain func-
tion that may arise from a “holofractal memory workspace” associated
with, but not reducible to the brain, which operates as a scale-invariant
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
130
mental attribute of reality. This field-receptive workspace integrates
past and (anticipated) future events and may explain overall ultra-rapid
brain responses, as well as the origin of qualia (Meijer et al, 2020, pp.
31–71).
16.15. Idealism’s imaginative expressions
As creator and host of Closer To Truth, I receive ideas from viewers
globally. These unsolicited papers are often elaborate treatises, the
majority of which focus on consciousness or cosmology. I look at all of
them, keep an open mind with at least one eye skeptical, learn some,
respond as I can. I marvel at the passion and respect the dedication.56
Addressing the "ultimate questions" of cosmic existence and human
sentience is the highest calling of human beings, which is why I appre-
ciate diverse ideas (Kuhn, 2023). While I cannot agree with many of the
assumptions, and certainly not with most of the assertions, I see the
scope of subjects as exemplifying the kinds of issues and challenges that
enliven the human spirit (small “s”).
To conclude this section on Idealism, I note several models of
idealism I’ve received (among many). The only judgment I pass is that
consciousness in general, and idealism in particular, fire the imagination
as well as stir the passions.
Flip-Book Idealism (FBI), developed by neuroscientist Silvia Paddock
and physicist Thomas Buervenich, agrees with other forms of idealism
that spacetime is not primary and that consciousness exists outside of it.
According to FBI, observer/participants, who are individuations of this
consciousness, detect patterns in a facet of consciousness called the
“Urgrund”—the fundamental essence of existence—and shape this in-
formation into frames of experience by translating complex signal pat-
terns into qualia. One hallmark of FBI is that the generation of
experiential frames by consciousness creates the arrow of time. Its
observer-based viewpoint of reality aligns with quantum mechanics,
such that wave-particle duality and entanglement (“spooky action at a
distance”) are no longer odd or mysterious. FBI distinguishes itself from
other forms of idealism by asserting that conscious agents primarily
interact with one another through the intermediary of the Urgrund in a
kind of question-and-answer game and by proposing that spacetime is a
set of rules that consciousness needs to adhere to when creating expe-
riential frames to allow for the experienced world to be consistent. FBI
does not solve the hard problem of consciousness but attests to its sig-
nificance (Paddock and Buervenich, 2023). According to reviewer Jo
Edwards, “The central idea is that our subjectivity is the inherently
conscious universe enjoying local snapshots in discrete time ‘frames’, set
by brain interactions, that are elided into a sense of movement and
continuity, as for a cartoon flipbook.” He concludes that the authors
make “a nice case for these being fundamental time units that in the
brain are a few milliseconds long but elsewhere will follow rules of
quantum field theory—perhaps as decoherence intervals. I think this is
the right direction to go in. It is nice to see mainstream quantum theory
rather than fringe interpretations or invocations of entanglement,
tachyons, or dark matter. Like genes, consciousness is likely to be based
on kitchen sink biophysics” (Edwards, 2024).
Rodrigues’s C-Pattern Theory. Neuroscientist Pablo Rodriguez posits
that the brain can generate only c-patterns, no experiences, because
experiences are qualitatively different from matter. Experiences are thus
regarded as created by the universe, in that c-patterns are constantly
“read” and converted to experiences. C-Pattern Theory has three basic
points. First, the brain doesn’t generate conscious experiences; it gen-
erates c-patterns, which are complex geometric three-dimensional
structures composed of all action potentials from all of the brain’s
[relevant] neurons firing at any given moment. The c-pattern’s specific
form and geometry is postulated as being what fully defines any
conscious experience. So, for every moment, there’s a different c-pattern
and a corresponding experience defined by it. Second, an experience is
defined by a c-pattern’s form, but each is created by the universe, not by
the brain; rather, a c-pattern’s specific form and geometry encodes an
experience as a discrete expressions of a universal geometric experience
language, which the universe understands perfectly and decodes into
real, actual experiences. Third, we are not body and brain; we are
consciousness. If c-patterns are mere symbols converted to experiences,
then only consciousness can be what’s having all experiences. And as we
are the ones experiencing, we are parts of consciousness. Different or-
ganisms have different c-patterns, experiences, and levels of under-
standing reality. So, this world is just what our c-patterns currently
allow, until we manage to expand them to the next level. Thus, true
human progress is possible only if the experience language is deciphered
and c-patterns are expanded towards greater understanding (Rodriguez,
2023).
The Meaning of Life. The primacy of consciousness explored via
science and logic, without leaping to faith or spiritual awakening. It
dissects the mind-body-spirit conundrum and provides a theory of
everything that posits that reality is an agreed-upon hallucination. It
includes the probative power of optical illusions, why linear time is a
stubborn illusion, and the roles that beauty, love, and creativity play to
help shape reality (Forrest, 2021).
Is-Ness. All consciousness is one. Every human spirit is unique, with
our singular thoughts, perceptions and experiences, like a whirlpool in
an infinite ocean of consciousness. While universal consciousness is
infinite in space and time, each conscious being experiences creation
from a unique perspective. The power of spirit does not come from its
past achievements or future aspirations, but from its existence in the
present instant. This is the essence of our existence. Awareness of this
essence is the state of "Is-Ness” (Koyoti, 2023).
Consciousness from Non-Self in Buddhism. Consciousness in the
sense of qualia and self-consciousness are not a two-tier, parallel rela-
tionship like that of the Cartesian Theatre or “Cogito, ergo sum”, but a
one-tier, serial relationship. The sense of self just emerges out of the
process of alternating “awareness” and “awareness of awareness.” This
view on consciousness comes from an interpretation of “non-self” in
Buddhism. Conversely, it also provides insight into consciousness-only
and anatta (from “non-self” to “emptiness”) in Buddhism: in reality,
there is neither subject nor object of “awareness” (or “consciousness”).
According to Yog¯ac¯ara, there is no object of awareness (or conscious-
ness). Therefore, the mystery behind “consciousness-only” should be
how consciousness arises. However, according to Madhyamaka, there is
even no consciousness and everything is empty (Huang, n.d.).
Consciousness’s Platonic Computation. Consciousness (the power to
conceive, perceive and be self-aware) is the most fundamental and
irreducible existence. Creation of all else is rendered by the “Platonic
computer” that is made by, of, with and from Consciousness. The hy-
pothesis of “Platonic computation” offers a solution to the inverse hard
problem of consciousness: how matter arises out of consciousness (Duan,
n.d.).
Hawkins’s Map of Consciousness. Psychiatrist and spiritual teacher
David Hawkins claims human consciousness comes arrayed with 17
levels and associated “energy fields,” with the “frequency” or “vibra-
tion” of energy increasing with each rise in level, along with corre-
sponding implications for emotional tone, view of God, and view of life.
Consciousness is pervasive, connecting to God via “devotional non-
duality” and enabling, at its higher levels, a beneficial and healing effect
on the world. Hawkins says his scientific framework elucidates the
spiritual levels delineated by saints, sages and mystics, with highest
56 Closer To Truth viewers come from ~190 countries. The passion to explore
ultimate questions of cosmos, consciousness, and meaning brings together
diverse countries, regions, religions, races, ethnicities, genders, ages, educa-
tional levels, income levels, and social classes. The only thing we all have in
common is the pursuit of these ultimate questions: expressing wonder and awe,
willing to hear diverse views. But this “only thing” is a “big thing.” We all face
the mysteries of cosmic existence and human sentience—the human condition,
aspiration and spirit that unify us all.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
131
levels representing Self-realization, the void, nothingness vs. allness, full
enlightenment, and divine realization.57 (Hawkins, 2014; Hawkins, n.
d.).
17. Anomalous and altered states theories
Can nonphysical consciousness (or realms) be revealed or accessed
via anomalous, psi or paranormal phenomena—extrasensory perception
(ESP), out-of-the-body experiences (OBEs), near-death experiences
(NDEs), and the like? Psychical research beginning in the late 19th
century and parapsychology in the mid-20th century sought to study the
phenomena scientifically.
To those who believe in its existence—researchers and general public
alike—the reality of psi/paranormal phenomena leads directly to con-
sciousness being nonphysical, as well as to nonphysical modes of mental
existence, whether as individual “spirits” or “souls” or in the broader
sense of nonphysical realms of parallel worlds (Radin, 2007; Schlitz,
2007; Tart, 2007). There are innumerable reports of ESP—telepathy,
clairvoyance, precognition, psychokinesis—the vast majority anecdotal,
some research-based; believers (“sheep”) and skeptics (“goats”) remain
equally adamant in their convictions. Moreover, even among psi-sheep
researchers, there are replicability problems and a possible paradox of
confounding interactions between the researcher (the observer) and the
experiment (the observed) (Rabeyron, 2020).
For the record, I remain skeptical regarding the overwhelming ma-
jority of anecdotal paranormal stories and circumspect regarding sta-
tistically significant research affirming psi. I consider likely drivers to be
illusion, delusion, fraud, imperfect experimental design, unwitting
experimenter bias, ex ante sample selection, ex post data selection, ex
post reasoning, and/or plain-old wishful thinking.
Still, I have to say, I generally respect parapsychologists and their
experimental designs, and I cannot rule out all paranormal stories. This
is why I must consider the profound implications for theories of con-
sciousness if any claims of psi and the paranormal would turn out to be
veridical. (In context of my skepticism and consideration, and in the
spirit of full disclosure, I have a history.58)
Parapsychologist Dean Radin distinguishes sharply between the
words paranormal and psi. They are not synonymous, he stresses. “The
paranormal is a tabloid trope that encompasses Bigfoot, astrology,
crystal healing, UFOs, the Bermuda Triangle, etc.,” he says. “Equating
paranormal with psi perpetuates the idea that psi is part of a great
silliness, and this is one of the many reasons why sober academics
strictly avoid the topic.” By contrast, Radin points out, “psi refers only to
common aspects of human experiences reported throughout history and
across all cultures, and psi research studies such experiences.” Radin
acknowledges, “Yes, 95% of these reports may have mundane expla-
nations, but 5% do not. And that 5% changes everything” (Radin, 2024).
Psi research, Radin notes, was “designed explicitly to exclude the
illusion, delusion, fraud, p-hacking [misuse of data analysis to report
false positives], and the like.” He asserts, “There is no better way to
demonstrate the current state of the evidence for psi than to read major
pro-psi and con-psi articles published in the APA’s flagship journal,
American Psychologist (Carde˜na, 2018; Reber and Alcock, 2020). The pro
article discusses meta-analyses of 10 classes of psi experiments reported
in over 1000 individual studies. In reply, the authors of the con article
state up front that they would not address the evidence because – and
they actually say this – psi is impossible. That’s the Spanish Inquisition
approach to ignoring uncomfortable facts, and yet that is the state of psi
skepticism today” (Radin, 2024).
Cardena’s paper, “The experimental evidence for parapsychological
phenomena: A Review,” clarifies “the domain of psi, summarizes recent
theories from physics and psychology that present psi phenomena as at
least plausible, and then provides an overview of recent/updated meta-
analyses.” The evidence, Cardena concludes, “provides cumulative
support for the reality of psi, which cannot be readily explained away by
the quality of the studies, fraud, selective reporting, experimental or
analytical incompetence, or other frequent criticisms.” The evidence for
psi, he says, “is comparable to that for established phenomena in psy-
chology and other disciplines, although there is no consensual under-
standing of them” (Carde˜na, 2018).
Reber and Alcock’s paper, “Searching for the impossible: Para-
psychology’s elusive quest,” presents an opposing perspective to “the
general claims of psi (the umbrella term often used for anomalous or
paranormal phenomena).” The authors mount “a broad-based critique of
the entire parapsychology enterprise.” Their position is straightforward:
“Claims made by parapsychologists cannot be true. The effects reported
can have no ontological status; the data have no existential value.”
Reber and Alcock base their stark conclusion “on well-understood sci-
entific principles. In the classic English adynaton, ‘pigs cannot fly.’
Hence, data that suggest that they can are necessarily flawed and result
from weak methodology or improper data analyses or are Type I er-
rors.59 So it must be with psi effects.” What they find “particularly
intriguing is that, despite the existential impossibility of psi phenomena
and the nearly 150 years of efforts during which there has been, literally,
no progress, there are still scientists who continue to embrace the pur-
suit” (Reber and Alcock, 2020).
The vast anecdotal literature of near-death experiences (NDEs) and
out-of-the-body experiences (OBEs) (17.12), amplified by innumerable
(supposed) communications with the dead, also some serious but
controversial research, gives rise to beliefs in a sentient afterlife, thus
giving apparent credence to non-materialistic theories of consciousness.
There are even reports of auras and halos around or emanating from
people; some claim to witness, at the moment of death, the soul
departing the body. “Terminal lucidity”—unanticipated and unex-
plained changes in mental clarity, verbal communication, and/or
physical capability in the days and hours before death when each pa-
tient’s medical condition should not allow for such sudden improve-
ments—suggests, to some, that there is something nonphysical going on
(Roehrs et al., 2023). Credulous readers will find an inexhaustible sup-
ply of NDE/OBE anecdotes and stories, but modest serious research of
sound design in which the extraordinary claims are supported unam-
biguously by extraordinary evidence (to paraphrase Carl Sagan) (I
acknowledge claims to the contrary.60).
Perhaps the most common claim of “evidence” that consciousness is
nonphysical comes from out-of-the-body experiences (Tart, 1987,
2007). Those having OBEs report their experiential awareness to be as a
nonphysical entity (spirit/soul) in a nonphysical world. It is all sensorily
or perceptibly real, vivid and stable, yet they sense not being in their
earthly bodies and not being in our earthly world. The more lucid
quality of OBE consciousness (compared to dream consciousness), which
57 From low to high, Hawkins’s 17 levels of consciousness: shame, guilt,
apathy, grief, fear, desire, anger, pride, courage, neutrality, willingness,
acceptance, reason, love, joy, peace, enlightenment (Hawkins, 2014). I should
note that while Hawkins has his acolytes—one of whom implored me to include
him on the Landscape—others call him a plagiarist and a charlatan.
58 I followed parapsychology from my mid-teens though undergraduate years.
J.B. Rhine, a pioneer in the field, invited me to do a PhD in parapsychology with
him at Duke—which I turned down to do brain research at UCLA (a surprisingly
wise choice for a passionate youngster). I continued to follow parapsychology,
with decreasing interest, though the 1970s. Decades later, I began again,
modestly, on Closer To Truth, and now with this Landscape, keeping both
skepticism and spirited speculation in a kind of superposition.
59 A type I error (false positive) occurs when a null hypothesis is rejected even
though it is actually true in the population.
60 Upon reviewing an early draft of this paper, cognitive scientist/para-
psychologist Edward Kelly said (after some pleasant words which shall remain
private), "I think you and Jonathan Schooler both substantially underestimate
the cumulative force of the evidence for psi processes."
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
132
is typical of OBEs, convinces OBE adherents of the nonphysical nature of
their personal consciousness and the reality of nonphysical realms.
It is no surprise that psi researchers are more compelled by labora-
tory tests than by OBE/NDE anecdotes. They also point to everyday
phenomena that people experience, such as thinking of someone and
then getting a text or phone call from them, fueling the sense that it feels
too unlikely to be a coincidence.
To philosopher and parapsychologist Stephen Braude, the answer to
the mind-body problem depends in part on how much exotic data you
are willing to entertain. “If you are willing to look seriously at some of
the data suggesting a persistence of personality after bodily death, after
the body has decomposed,” he says, “then certainly the conventional
materialist, neurophysiological view goes out the window” (Braude,
2007a). (For mathematician-astronomer Bernard Carr, paranormal
phenomena inform his views of consciousness and the nature of
fundamental reality—11.10.)
The fact of the matter—whether such psi/paranormal phenomena
have credible claims on reality, or whether they are purely and merely
illusion, delusion, poor design or faulty analysis (those that aren’t
already outright frauds)—is not for adjudication or even for assessment
here. (But the wholly skeptical view, personified engagingly by Susan
Blackmore, does need voice [Blackmore, 2002, 2007].)
Rather, if any of these psi/paranormal phenomena—even if a
minuscule fraction of them—is real and does challenge or defy the laws
of physics as currently construed, then non-materialistic theories of
consciousness would have to be taken more seriously. This possibility,
however remote or however likely, justifies inclusion, at least for me, of
psi-motivated theories of consciousness here on the Landscape of
possible explanations.
I largely agree with Alex Gomez-Marin: “The study of consciousness
requires that we take seriously the many flavors of human experience,
particularly those that lie at the edges of what is typically explored
scientifically and discussed in public. From psychedelics and synchro-
nicities, to lucid dreaming and psychic phenomena, the ‘backdoors of
perception’ have the potential to transform not just neuroscience and
physics but our very understanding of the nature of reality and our place
in it” (Gomez-Marin, 2023b). (I am, however, modestly less optimistic
that meaningful progress can be made.)
The more general “altered states of consciousness” subsumes diverse
deviations from our normal alert, waking consciousness as induced by
various physiological, psychological, or pharmacological actions or
agents (Altered state of consciousness, 2023). Charles Tart, whose book,
Altered States of Consciousness, was the first comprehensive treatment of
the subject, focuses on the subjective nature of the experience: "Altered
states of consciousness are alternate patterns or configurations of
experience, which differ qualitatively from a baseline state," stressing
“… such that the experiencer feels his consciousness is radically
different from the way it functions ordinarily” (Tart, 1969).
Note that Anomalous and Altered States theories, strictly speaking,
are generally not theories of consciousness per se in that they are not
theories of what consciousness is. Rather, they are claimed as evidence
of what consciousness is not—not reducible to neurobiological states
without residue. It is natural that those who interpret psi results favor-
ably are also motivated to accept (or to create) non-local theories of
consciousness. Moreover, while advocates of Anomalous and Altered
States theories skew toward dualist or idealist theories, they espouse all
the non-materialist theories: quantum, panpsychism and monism as well
as dualism and idealism. For example, Dean Radin supports a “quantum
oriented,” non-substance dualism (17.3), while Charles Tart supports an
“emergent interactionism” substance dualism (17.4). All the theories
that follow are motivated, at least in significant part, by anomalous, psi
or paranormal phenomena (often NDEs and OBEs).
17.1. Bergson’s multiplicity, duration, perception, memory
Late 19th/early 20th century philosopher Henri Bergson’s non-
reductive consciousness is an unapologetic, sophisticated challenge to
Materialism Theories. In consciousness, he says, “we find succeeding
states without distinction; and, in space, simultaneities which, without
succeeding, are distinguished, in the sense that one is no longer there
when the other one appears. Outside of us, reciprocal exteriority without
succession: within, succession without reciprocal exteriority” (Bergson,
1889; Pascal, 2023).
Bergson’s consciousness, which “retains the past and anticipates the
future,” is not easy to categorize. It is the complex centerpiece of his
grand philosophical system that highlights several original concepts:
multiplicity (heterogeneity and continuity, the immediate data of con-
sciousness); duration (no juxtaposition of events, no mechanistic cau-
sality, a qualitative multiplicity); perception (pure, images are all we
sense); memory (pure, personal)—each from Bergson’s idiosyncratic
perspective (Lawlor and Moulard-Leonard, 2021).
Bergson self-characterizes his own view as “frankly dualist,” because
it “affirms both the reality of matter and the reality of spirit,” though he
recognizes (and thinks he can overcome) “the theoretical difficulties
which have always beset dualism.” Bergson rejects that “matter is a
thing that possesses a hidden power able to produce representations in
us. There is no hidden power in matter; matter is only images.” He cri-
tiques materialism by “showing that matter does not differ in nature
from representation … the image is less than a thing but more than a
representation” Moreover, Bergson’s theory of “pure perception” posits
that how we know things, in their pure states, is representational, thus
establishing a middle ground between realism and idealism (Lawlor and
Moulard-Leonard, 2021).
To Bergson, “That which perceives is consciousness, that is to say the
memory taken as a whole because this consciousness, which we might call
here human soul or human spirit, is a continuous movement between pure
perception and pure memory.” “The brain does not perceive: it transmits
perception (pure or not) from the organ of perception to consciousness
(sensory mechanism) and, conversely, it transmits the nascent order of
action from consciousness to the appropriate motor organ to act in
response to perception (motor mechanism) (Bergson, 1896, 1990;
Pascal, 2023).
Continuing, Bergson puts memory at the heart of consciousness with
pithy propositions. “Mind with memory is consciousness and produces
time. Mind without memory is the unconscious and produces space.”
“The phenomena of memory are at the juncture of consciousness and
matter.” “Going from pure perception to memory, we definitively leave
matter behind for the mind.” “First the present becomes past and then
the past becomes present. Thus, consciousness becomes the bridge be-
tween the present and the past which we call the future. The future is
being fabricated at all times by a free act called choice of consciousness”
(Bergson, 1896, 1990; Pascal, 2023).
Bergson has consciousness as “unquestionably connected with the
brain: but it by no means follows that a brain is indispensable to con-
sciousness.” The brain, he says, is not the generator of consciousness, but
a “filter” of consciousness, because unfiltered consciousness would be
shattering and stupefying. Our capacity to focus and act in the world is
enabled by our brain acting as barrier, shielding our personal awareness
from the vast cacophony swirling in the great beyond (Bergson, 1920).
Bergson’s notion of consciousness is “a ceaselessly dynamic, inher-
ently temporal substance of reality” that might even allow for some sort
of survival after death (Barnard, 2011). Is Bergson a kind of dualist,
panpsychist or even idealist? No matter. Certainly, he is no materialist.
He was president of the Society for Psychical Research, which no doubt
reflects his views and warrants his inclusion in this category.
According to Alex Gomez-Marin, "The essential debate about the
precise relationship between thoughts and brains (solidarity versus
equivalence, participation versus interaction, etc.) has faded. But one
can revisit Henri Bergson to find a lucid dose of common sense: ‘That
there is a close connection between a state of consciousness and the
brain we do not dispute. But there is also a close connection between a
coat and the nail on which it hangs, for, if the nail is pulled out, the coat
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
133
falls to the ground. Shall we say, then, that the shape of the nail gives us
the shape of the coat, or in any way corresponds to it?’ What do brain
data really show? The edifice of twenty-first-century consciousness
neuroscience stands on the foundations of the following candid empir-
ical fact: ‘change the brain, experience changes.’ The hard problem of
wardrobes is to explain why and how hangers give rise to clothes”
(Gomez-Marin, 2022).
Moreover, Gomez-Marin and Juan Arnau retrieve an argument by
Bergson to expose, what they call “the fundamental self-contradiction of
parallelism: it forces the idealist to sustain that ‘the part is the whole’,
and the realist that ‘the part subsists when the remainder of the whole
vanishes.’” Bergson’s image-movement theory (from Matter and Mem-
ory) is then recast “to overcome the conceptual dead-end of paral-
lelism”—the point being that “Consciousness is real. So is its special
relation to the brain. Differentiating between solidarity (as lesions
demonstrate) and equivalence (as no data does) offers an alternative
point of departure for an understanding of consciousness that does not,
from the outset, outlay a false problem” (Gomez-Marin and Arnau,
2019).
17.2. Jung’s collective unconscious and synchronicity
Psychiatrist/psychoanalyst Carl Jung famously posits a “collective
unconscious,” a hidden, quasi-nonphysical aspect of reality with which
each individual human subconsciousness is in some sense connected.
Prime features of the collective unconscious, according to Jung, are
“archetypes” and “synchronicity:” archetypes are ancient primal sym-
bols, themes and images that are apparently universal and recurring and
can impact individual psyches; and synchronicity describes putative
connections between physical and/or mental events that are acausal and
seemingly random but appear to be meaningfully related.
Synchronicity is properly controversial, because, according to the
laws of physics, there should be nothing of the sort. But if, perchance,
synchronicity does exist and it does represent real phenomena—if syn-
chronous events are not mere chance masquerading as meaning—then
synchronicity would be a powerful probe of novel fundamental realities
of mind and world, and it would, en passant, take down classic
materialism.61
Jung had been intrigued by the ancient Chinese oracle I Ching, whose
64 hexagram symbols generated divinations “made by seemingly
random numerical happenings for which the I Ching text gives detailed
situational analysis.” Years later, Jung introduced synchronicity "to
describe circumstances that appear meaningfully related yet lack a
causal connection." Other definitions Jung used enriched synchro-
nicity’s non-normal vision of reality: "a hypothetical factor equal in rank
to causality as a principle of explanation," "an acausal connecting prin-
ciple," "acausal parallelism," and the "meaningful coincidence of two or
more events where something other than the probability of chance is
involved” (Synchronicity, 2023).
Collaborating with physicist and Nobel laureate Wolfgang Pauli
(Pauli Exclusion Principle), Jung further developed the radical concept.
Pauli contributed his intimate understanding of the common sense-
defying elements of quantum theory, such as complementarity, non-
locality, and the observer effect, and their work together yielded what is
now called the “Pauli–Jung conjecture”—which stands for “a basic
psychophysically neutral reality with its derivative mental and physical
aspects and the nature of the correlations that connect these aspects.”
Jung and Pauli "offered the radical and brilliant idea that the currency of
these [synchronicity’s] correlations is not (quantitative) statistics, as in
quantum physics, but (qualitative) meaning” (Atmanspacher, 2020b;
Atmanspacher and Fuchs, 2014).
For his part, Pauli said that synchronicities were "corrections to
chance fluctuations by meaningful and purposeful coincidences of
causally unconnected events," though he sought to move away from
“coincidence” and towards a "correspondence," "connection," or
"constellation" of discrete factors. Jung’s and Pauli’s position was that,
“just as causal connections can provide a meaningful understanding of
the psyche and the world, so too may acausal connections” (Synchro-
nicity, 2023).
The speculative nexus between synchronicity and quantum physics
turns on entanglement, where there is absolute correlation but abso-
lutely no transference of information. Thus, quantum entanglement is
said to be the physical phenomenon that most closely represents the
concept of synchronicity. As Harald Atmanspacher puts it. “Inspired by
and analogous to entanglement-induced nonlocal correlations in quan-
tum physics, mind-matter entanglement is conceived as the hypothetical
origin of mind-matter correlations. This exhibits the highly speculative
picture of a fundamentally holistic, psychophysically neutral level of
reality from which correlated mental and material domains emerge”
(Atmanspacher, 2020a).
Atmanspacher probes for epistemic/ontic commonalities between
synchronicity and entanglement. He highlights “local realism” of
empirical facts obtained from classical measuring instruments and a
“holistic realism” of entangled systems, arguing that “these domains are
connected by the process of measurement, thus far conceived as inde-
pendent of conscious observers. The corresponding picture on the
mental side refers to a distinction between conscious and unconscious
domains” (Atmanspacher, 2020a).
A further claim concerns Jung’s “depth psychology” conceptions,
where these two domains of local realism and holistic realism are con-
nected by the emergence of conscious mental states from the uncon-
scious, analogous apparently to physical measurement. Crucially,
famously, “Jung’s unconscious has a collective component, unseparated
between individuals and populated by so-called archetypes.” These ar-
chetypes are said to be “constituting the psychophysically neutral level
comprising both the collective unconscious and the holistic reality of
quantum theory.” At the same time, Atmanspacher says, “they operate
as ‘ordering factors’, being responsible for the arrangement of their
psychical and physical manifestations in the epistemically distinguished
domains of mind and matter” (Atmanspacher, 2020a).
So, here’s the axial question: Does the “acausal connection principle”
in synchronicity meaningfully parallel the “acausal correlation princi-
ple” in quantum entanglement? Is this apparent parallelism revelatory
or shoehorn forced, unveiling profound new realities, or overthinking
superficial similarities? Again, the axial question.
Why have I situated Jung’s collective unconscious on this Landscape
of Consciousness? The reason is somewhat indirect, because, if valid as
stated, a literal collective unconscious would falsify many theories of
consciousness, certainly defeat every strictly materialistic theory.
Moreover, it would be consistent with diverse nonphysical theories:
Dualism, Panpsychism, and Idealism. Idealism is most often associated
with Jung’s worldview.
While Jung is recognized as one of the most important psychologists
in history, few scientists take his concept of the collective unconscious as
literally true. However, Jung’s highlighting (and coining) synchronicity
does elicit from time to time far-reaching theories in both physics and
consciousness regarding anomalous cognition and events.
17.3. Radin’s challenge to materialism
Coming at consciousness from an empirical point of view, para-
psychologist Dean Radin calls on what he believes to be the over-
whelming evidence for psi phenomena in order to infer that “intention
affects the physical world.” He characterizes his work as “a tiny part of a
century-long legacy of researchers who have reported studies, when
meta-analyzed, provide strong evidence for psi” (Radin, 2007).
Radin notes that non-local conscious experiences are commonly re-
ported (prevalence rates well above 10% and as high as 90%). Moreover,
61 I was introduced to synchronicity by Arthur Koestler’s 1972 book, The Roots
of Coincidence.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
134
cognitive abilities can be retained when the brain is seriously compro-
mised. For example, in terminal lucidity patients with terminal neuro-
degenerative conditions can display apparently normal cognitive
function and mental clarity during the short period preceding death;
paradoxical lucidity can occur in dementia due to advanced Alzheimer’s
disease, brain abscesses, tumors, strokes, and meningitis.62
Radin recruits the happy term “magic,” as in “real magic,” to facili-
tate public appreciation that psi/paranormal phenomena are a natural
aspect of reality (Radin, 2018), and he claims strong experimental or
empirical evidence for three types of “real magic:” (i) “divination,”
which in today’s world is perceiving through space and time and which
is identical to clairvoyance, remote viewing, precognition; (ii) “force of
will,” which causes “psycho-kinetic effects,” the idea that your mindful
intention can affect aspects of the physical world beyond yourself; and
(iii) “theurgy,” by which Radin means the practice of engaging or
communicating with spirits, entities that are not human and invisible to
most people (Radin, 2022).
Then, Radin says, you start thinking like a scientist and ask how
could these phenomena happen? “Well, what are the ‘force beams’
coming out of the head? But we don’t see any beams coming out. In fact,
even the evidence doesn’t exactly look like it’s a causal mechanism.
These are weird relationships that arise.” Next, Radin says, is to consider
some kind of “downward causation” effect. I suppose that’s possible, he
says, “but it just seems to make more sense if really at the bottom is
simply consciousness. There’s some kind of ‘ocean of consciousness’ that
gives rise to an emergent property, which we may call energy, which
gives rise to matter, and then the physical world plays out in a way that
we usually see it, except that really at the bottom is consciousness.” It’s
much, much easier, Radin says, “to simply imagine that matter is ulti-
mately composed of mind, that mind and matter are ultimately the same
thing, than to imagine the complex mechanisms of mind-body/brain
interactions” (Radin, 2007).
Radin and colleagues point to specific non-local effects to support
their proposal that “post-materialistic models of consciousness may be
required to break the conceptual impasse presented by the hard problem
of consciousness.” They review several alternative non-physicalist the-
ories: all of which purport to refute the central premise of physicalist
theories that consciousness is generated solely and purely by the brain
and is only local to the brain. Most of these theories have quantum or
panpsychism pedigrees; some even propose that consciousness is more
fundamental than energy-matter and spacetime (Wahbeh et al., 2022).
Radin and colleagues propose that “consciousness may not originate
in the brain,” although many aspects of human consciousness are
obviously dependent on the brain. They also suggest that awareness too
extends beyond the brain. While they affirm with conviction that these
non-physical, non-local properties of consciousness are observable, they
are less confident as to the underlying mechanism of how they work. It
may be, they say “due to a non-local material effect, to consciousness
being fundamental, or something else we have not yet discovered”
(Wahbeh et al., 2022).
Thus, Radin and colleagues propose “specific phenomena that we
would expect to see if non-local consciousness theories are correct:”
Perceiving information about distant locations (clairvoyance, including
remote viewing); perceiving information from another person (telep-
athy); perceiving the future (precognition); and apparent cognitive
abilities beyond the experience/learning/skill of the person exhibiting
them (e.g., speaking a foreign language they do not know, i.e., speaking
“in tongues”) (Wahbeh et al., 2022).
In defending their quantum-oriented approach to the mind-brain
problem, Stuart Kauffman and Radin cite as evidence for a nonlocal
mind the predictions of two types of nonlocal experiences: “The mind
would have the capacity to extend beyond the mind-brain system, and
the act of observing a distant physical system would, to some degree,
directly influence the behavior of that system.” Such effects, they claim,
would occasionally result in experiences “where minds interact with
other minds, where minds perceive hidden or distant objects or events,
and where minds directly influence aspects of the physical world”
(Kauffman and Radin, 2020).
The common terms for these psi phenomena are the following:
“telepathy for mind-to-mind interactions; clairvoyance for perceptions of
inanimate things across space; precognition for perceptions through time;
and psychokinesis for mental influence of physical objects.” Kauffman
and Radin stress that use of these different terms does not imply that the
underlying phenomena are different in kind; “they are just labels used to
describe the way the experiences seem to manifest” (Kauffman and
Radin, 2020).
While Radin’s primary line of argument uses psi phenomena to
corroborate a nonlocal mind of a quantum-oriented nature, one can
reverse the causal-explanatory direction such that a nonlocal mind could
provide a mechanism for psi phenomena (Kauffman and Radin, 2020).
(Note that the arrow of causation or explanation can point in either
direction, although not in both directions in the same argument, which
would be circular.)
17.4. Tart’s emergent interactionism
Consciousness explorer Charles Tart proposes “Emergent Inter-
actionism” as a dualistic theory of consciousness, based on his long work
on altered states of consciousness, transpersonal psychology, and mul-
tiple forms of parapsychology (Tart, 1978a, 2007). He calls it “pragmatic
dualism,” in that it reflects the nature of things and recognizes the need
to understand consciousness in terms of two qualitatively different as-
pects of reality: a “B system” of brain and body governed by physical
law, and a “M/L system” of the mental and life aspects of reality.
Consciousness, Tart says, is a “system property,” an emergent from
the auto-psi interaction of the B and M/L systems. Ultimate under-
standing of consciousness, then, in addition to conventional neurosci-
ence,
also
requires
increasing
knowledge
of
psi/paranormal
phenomena.
Tart claims that the veracity of psi phenomena is a clear-cut scientific
demonstration of the inadequacy of a materialistic view of mind and
matter. The “psychoneural identity hypothesis,” he says, is so widely
accepted in science and so thoroughly discredited by ESP and para-
psychology (Tart, 1978a).
Tart’s extraordinary hypothesis is that psi is being used much of the
time in everyone’s life, but it is being used internally. This means, he
offers, we frequently use auto-clairvoyance to read our own B system
and auto-psychokinesis to affect our B systems. This is ordinary psi,
auto-psi. What we observe in parapsychological experiments, however,
is non-ordinary psi, which is taking a process ordinarily confined within
a single organism and pushing it outside, making it “allo-psi” (Tart,
1978a, personal communication).
The Emergent Interactionist position allows for kinds of potential
survival beyond bodily death, Tart speculates, but it would not neces-
sarily be the kind of postmortem survival we usually conceive of. Our
usual imagery of survival means survival of the basic pattern of our
consciousness, our experience of our mental life, our feelings of personal
identity. But if consciousness, as Tart proposes, is an emergent of the
auto-psi interactions of the B and the M/L systems, an emergent of
62 In the last two or so years of her life, due to advanced dementia, my mother,
Lee Kuhn (n´ee Lena Kahn), who died at 102, formerly a vibrant personality, did
not speak at all. However, on four or five occasions, she would suddenly blurt
out, in loud and confident voice, complete, articulate, sharply formed senten-
ces. To me, while I was working intensely on my computer: “With all that junk
you’re doing on that machine, at least are you making any money?” To the
caregivers: “It’s not that I can’t talk. It’s that I don’t want to talk to you!" (My
mother was always, well, feisty). It did not occur to me that this behavior,
however startling, could support theories of consciousness that are not brain-
bound. While geriatric neurology has ample resources to explain such phe-
nomena naturally, I suppose it could also align with nonlocal theories.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
135
constant patterning of each system upon the other, then if the B system
ceases functioning in death, the patterning influence of the B system
upon the M/L system will cease, so how is ordinary consciousness, as we
know it, to survive? What is the emergent to emerge from?
One answer, according to Tart—and not the pleasant answer people
would like—may be that personal identity, which is so intimately
intertwined with ordinary consciousness, does not survive death, at least
not for very long, and in any event it would likely be quite different from
the original person (Tart, 1978a).
Moreover, Tart stresses, psi phenomena radicalize even further the
nonphysical dimension of dualism by showing how consciousness re-
veals or enables space and time to be flexible and mobile. He proposes
that an extended aspect of the mind, which is activated when psi abilities
are used, has two properties that differ from our ordinary consciousness.
The first is that psi-engaged consciousness is not spatially or temporally
localized with respect to ordinary spatial and temporal constraints on
the physical body/brain, and so somehow can pick up information at
spatial locations outside the sensory range of the body/brain (Tart,
1978b).
The second property of psi-engaged consciousness is that the center
point of its experienced present can be located at a different temporal
location than the center point of the experienced present of ordinary
consciousness. That is, it may be centered around a time that, by ordi-
nary standards, is past or future. Furthermore, the duration of this
extended dimension of the mind’s experienced present is wider than that
of our ordinarily experienced present, such that the mind may include
portions of time that, from our ordinary point of view, are both past and
future as well as present (Tart, 1978a).
17.5. Josephson’s psi-informed models
Nobel laureate physicist Brian Josephson approaches consciousness
from the dual perspectives of fundamental science and psi phenomena.
He posits understanding the brain by “implementing the demands of an
appropriate collection of models, each concerned with some aspect of
brain and behaviour”—in particular, explaining “higher-level properties
[e.g., phenomenology] in terms of lower-level ones by means of a series
of inferences based on these models” (Josephson, 2004).
Josephson says that many scientists believe that psi is real but don’t
come out and say so due to social pressures and career concerns. He
considers the immense implications if, say, telepathy exists. “All sorts of
things would change if we accepted that paranormal things happen and
that we have such connections.” One simple example is playing music in
an ensemble, where, using telepathy, “they somehow lock into a single
state and perform better” (Josephson, 2012a).
As for how psi could work, Josephson posits quantum phys-
ics—Einstein’s “spooky actions at a distance”—but also recognizes that
“we probably need to include new dimensions of reality.” He points to
biology, the emergence of life, as a “strange phenomenon” that “changes
the whole game.” Biology, he says, “involves principles that we don’t
have in physics, and these principles might be able to unfold in quite
dramatic ways, extending our understanding of the cosmos, perhaps
because biological principles lead to minds and minds can do things.”
Josephson sees biology and consciousness as fundamentally linked
because “organisms deal with information in a certain way and con-
sciousness could fit into that.” There could be some kind of “biological
field,” analogous to the electric field, he says. The assumption that you
can get to some ultimate level, though, “may be incorrect.”
Josephson’s “theory of everything” paradigm, informed by psi and
based on “parallels between spontaneously fluctuating equilibrium
states and life processes,” envisions “an evolving ensemble of experts
[modules], each with its own goals but nevertheless acting in harmony
with each other.” How such an ensemble might function and evolve, he
says, can affect fundamental physics such as symmetry and symmetry
breaking. Josephson says, “This picture differs from that of regular
physics in that goal-directedness has an important role to play,
contrasting with that of the conventional view which implies a mean-
ingless universe” (Josephson, 2021).
Moreover, advancing John Wheeler’s proposal that “repeated acts of
observation give rise to the reality that we observe,” Josephson suggests
that “nature has a deep technological aspect that evolves as a result of
selection processes that act upon observers making use of the technol-
ogies.” He concludes that “our universe is the product of agencies that
use these evolved technologies to suit particular purposes” (Josephson,
2015). Going for ultimates, Josephson proposes that “something is
happening behind the universe on a larger, possibly infinite scale, that
has this organization and is doing things—like bringing a universe into
being, setting up its laws, and perhaps directing its evolution”
(Josephson, 2012b).
17.6. Wilber’s Integral Theory
Charismatic, iconoclastic philosopher Ken Wilber puts forth “Integral
Theory” as an overarching metatheory that seeks to harmonize
numerous
(100+),
diverse
philosophical
and
spiritual
theo-
ries—including consciousness studies, meditative traditions, religious
traditions, psychology, transpersonal psychology, parapsychology and
sociology—into a single, coherent framework that accounts for the
human condition, broadly conceived. Integral Theory is founded on a
developmental “spectrum of consciousness,” an evolutionary account
from ancient non-life-to-life proto-consciousness to ultimate spirit/
spiritual attainment or enlightenment. In New-Age intellectual circles,
Integral Theory is lauded as a pioneering, path-setting model for novel
explorations of consciousness and human futures (Section: Integral
Theory/WIlber, 2024).
Wilber’s core framework is a four-quadrant model—the AQAL (All
Quadrants All Levels) model—the simple-sounding 2x2 grid arraying
interior-exterior with individual-collective. The ambitious claim is that
all essential theories, models and levels of individual psychology and
spiritual development, and of collective expressions of social organiza-
tion, can be subsumed and discerned within Wilber’s AQAL system.
Moreover, according to its proponents, all forms of knowledge and
experience can be conceptualized as fitting and flowing together within
the model.
In his 1995 classic, Sex, Ecology, Spirituality: The Spirit of Evolution,
Wilber combines sex and gender issues, ecological wisdom, and non-
sectarian spirituality into what adherents see as a prescient, coherent
vision for contemporary times. Founded on the emergence of mind and
the evolution of human consciousness, and on combatting philosophical
naturalism (which he considers as a source of the world’s ills), Wilber
asks a critical question: Can spiritual concerns be integrated with the
modern world? Wilber conceives of the “Kosmos” (not “cosmos,” which
is too physicalist for him) as consisting of several concentric spheres:
matter (the physical universe); then life (the vital realm); then mind (the
mental realm); then soul (the psychic realm); and then finally Spirit (the
spiritual realm) (Wilber, 1995).
In his 1999 book, Integral Psychology: Consciousness, Spirit, Psychol-
ogy, Therapy, Wilber seeks to reestablish spiritual consciousness in
contemporary developmental psychology by embracing “every legiti-
mate aspect of human consciousness [Eastern and Western, ancient and
modern] under one roof.” Wilber’s project is to legitimatize, within the
framework of modern science, the spiritual quest (Wilber, 1999).
What’s the relationship between Wilber’s project and this Landscape
of theories of (phenomenal) consciousness? It is direct in that if Wilber
succeeds, Materialism Theories of consciousness are obviously under-
mined and likely defeated. Although Wilber does not get much into the
consciousness-categories game, his core developmental process begins
with a separation of individual consciousness from a transcendental
reality, and then his grand course of human development moves toward
restoring the primordial unity of human and transcendental conscious-
ness (Integral Theory/WIlber, 2024).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
136
17.7. Combs’s chaotic attractor and autopoietic systems
Consciousness researcher and systems theorist Allan Combs uses
nonlinear dynamics, and more specifically chaos theory, to understand
how all the elements of conscious experience “cling together to form the
many states and structures of consciousness that characterize the onflow
of our experiential lives.” (Section: Combs, 2022). In doing so, Combs
channels William James, “This multitude of ideas, existing absolutely,
yet clinging together, and weaving an endless carpet of themselves, …
like dominoes in ceaseless change, or the bits of glass in a kaleidosco-
pe—whence do they get their fantastic laws of clinging, and why do they
cling in just the shapes they do?” (James, 1890).
“We live in a nonlinear universe,” Combs says, which means that
“nothing turns out exactly as one might expect based on projections
from the past.” While this is true in physics and astronomy, it is “even
more true in the realms of biological systems and the mind.” What re-
sults is “the emergence of novel interacting elements,” which is “an
essential feature of countless real-world events.” Moreover, in chaotic
systems, like the weather, while there are recognizable general patterns,
“it is impossible to make precise predictions about future behav-
ior”—local or moment-to-moment details are always unpredictable.
The action of chaotic systems can be mapped topologically as
attractors, that is, as recognizable mathematical patterns that repeat or
almost repeat themselves indefinitely. But systems that can be repre-
sented as chaotic attractors never repeat themselves precisely. “Many
complex systems of a biological nature, such as the metabolic rhythms of
a living cell, EEG responses to sensory stimuli, and circadian sleep cy-
cles, are in a strict sense always novel. That is, they are never exactly the
same twice.” Even the action of a healthy human heart shows variation
from beat to beat (Combs, 2022).
According to Combs, consciousness, the onflow of experience, “fits
the bill nicely as a chaotic-like attractor.” To begin with, it is always in
motion, dynamic and ever-changing. Moreover, like all chaotic attrac-
tors, it displays a recognizable pattern; yet, it is never exactly the same
during different cycles. Indeed, this unique feature of each person’s
onflow of experience is what James considered to be the basic signature
of an individual personality. “Each of us, for instance, experiences
unique patterns of thoughts, feelings, perceptions, memories, and so on,
that replay in roughly the same way day in and day out.” But never
precisely the same. Thus, consciousness as a chaotic attractor is ever-
changing yet identifiable, “in a fashion that amounts to a distinct
signature of the individual’s experiential life.”
Combs recruits the concept of “autopoiesis” to help explain con-
sciousness. Autopoiesis means capable of generating and maintaining
itself by producing its own parts—“auto” meaning "self" and “poiesis”
meaning "creation” or “production” (Humberto and Varela, 1980)—a
concept applied widely in understanding biological systems, such as the
self-maintaining biochemistry of living cells.
Assuming consciousness, as James had it, is “the onflow of thoughts,
memories, and emotions that recreate themselves as they go along,
‘clinging together, and weaving an endless carpet of themselves’ …
[then] this description fits the notion of a chaotic autopoietic attractor.”
For example, Combs cites how “joy, anger, and sadness tend to sustain
themselves by creating their own self-perpetuating internal conditions.”
Emotional states self-propagate, he says, “thereby creating coherent self-
organizing streams of experience,” with each such state accompanied by
its own neurochemistry, which also contributes to its resilience (Combs,
2022).
In addition, cognitive patterns by which we understand the world
exemplify the mind as a complex, self-creating autopoietic system. The
mind also exhibits features of a chaotic system on the “edge of chaos” or
“the brink of change,” characterized by “periods of relative stability
punctuated by phases of instability, or increased chaotic behavior, after
which they may return to their original state, or transition (bifurcate) to
a new attractor pattern” (Combs, 2022).
17.8. Schooler’s resonance theory and subjective time
Experimental psychologist Jonathan Schooler outlines a theory of
consciousness that combines two novel ideas: “resonance theory,” where
multiple levels of consciousness interact, and “subjective time,” where
consciousness arises with an observer’s movement through objective
time relative to a currently unacknowledged dimension of subjective
time (Schooler, 2022a). Both ideas are motivated by Schooler’s research
and thinking on meta-consciousness, mind wandering, and anomalous
cognition (i.e., psi/paranormal phenomena).
The first idea is what he calls meta-consciousness or meta-awareness.
In addition to having experiences, he says, “periodically, I check-in on
what’s going on in my mind. And I may notice things that I hadn’t
noticed otherwise; for example, mind wandering while reading. We all
have the experience of reading along and suddenly realizing that,
although our eyes are moving across the page, we have no idea what
we’re reading. We’re thinking about something completely unrelated.
It’s as if we’re waking up, but we were awake all along” (Schooler,
2022a). Temporal dissociations are revealed when an individual, who
previously lacked meta-consciousness about the contents of conscious-
ness, directs meta-consciousness towards those contents (e.g., catching
one’s mind wandering during reading) (Schooler, 2002).
Appreciating the distinction between consciousness and meta-con-
sciousness helps to clarify a variety of phenomenal experiences. As
Schooler notes, “when we’re entering a moment of meta-consciousness,
when we recognize that we can have experience without being meta-
aware of that experience, it helps to open up the discussion about con-
sciousness. We can have an emotion and not realize that we’re having it.
We may not notice that we’re angry. When people shout, ‘I’m not angry,’
they are attempting to take stock of it, but they get it wrong. By
recognizing this distinction between experiential consciousness and
meta-consciousness we can gain broader perspectives on the varieties of
consciousness and deeper understanding of the nature of consciousness”
(Schooler, 2022a).
Meta-consciousness is said to correspond to conscious states in which
the content of those states includes an explicit characterization of what
is currently being experienced. In other words, he says, meta-con-
sciousness is simply a kind of conscious experience in which the focus of
thought is turned on to itself. Thus, although conscious and unconscious
mental processes are categorically distinct, conscious and meta-
conscious states differ only with respect to the type of content that they
entail (Schooler and Mrazek, 2015).
“Resonance theory” leverages meta-consciousness by positing mul-
tiple levels or streams of consciousness going on simultaneously. In the
same way that the brain’s left and right hemispheres seem to carry on
multiple streams of consciousness, Schooler says it’s possible that lower
levels or “windows” may have their own, albeit circumscribed conscious
experiences. And the way that these windows are communicating with
one another is through resonances of assorted kinds. Within a single
window, all can be happening in synchrony, and then, between levels,
there is cross-frequency coupling. And it is through these various kinds
of resonances, both top-down and bottom-up circuits, that multiple
potentially sentient windows may be able to communicate with one
another, thus producing what we know as macroscopic consciousness
(Schooler, 2022a).
According to Schooler, the resonance theory of consciousness works
via a shared resonance that allows different parts of the brain to achieve
a phase transition in the speed and bandwidth of information flows
between the constituent parts. This phase transition allows for richer
varieties of consciousness to arise, with the character and content of that
consciousness in each moment determined by the particular set of
constituent neurons (Hunt and Schooler, 2019).
Schooler recognizes that because the idea driving his resonance
theory is that we may have multiple levels of consciousness, he affirms
what Daniel Dennett denies: a “Cartesian Theater” in the brain. Whereas
Dennett disparages the “Cartesian Theater” as imaginary, Schooler
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
137
champions its reality.
“I do think that, at any given moment, there is a vantage,” Schooler
states, “but I also think that it’s just one of multiple vantages that are
happening in the mind. We have multiple windows; we have what we
call ‘nested observer windows’. And so, we imagine that consciousness
may actually be these nested windows, windows upon windows, with
each one resonating with the others. In this way, through the shared
resonance between different windows, at different levels of awareness,
we may construct an ever increasingly complex conscious experience.”
Thus, Schooler conjectures that there may be not just a single Cartesian
Theater, but in fact a “Cartesian Multiplex” of multiple nested observers
(Schooler, 2022a).
The second idea undergirding Schooler’s theory of consciousness is
the real possibility of “anomalous cognition” (i.e., psi/paranormal
phenomena). “I have a motto,” he says, “’entertaining without
endorsing’, meaning I see sufficient evidence such that psi phenomena
deserve consideration—hundreds of studies that have found positive
results. But at the same time, the failures to replicate, and the profound
challenges in understanding how it could exist, if it does exist, lead me to
feel that we are far from being able to endorse it as being a real phe-
nomenon” (Schooler, 2022b; Schooler et al., 2018).
For example, although accounts of precognition (i.e., the mind
perceiving events that have not yet occurred) have been prevalent across
human history, Schooler and colleagues say it is no surprise that these
claims have been met with strong skepticism, but rather than dismissing
the claims, they call for more research to bridge the gap between
skeptics and proponents (Franklin et al., 2014).
While scientists on both sides may usefully vary in the criteria that
they set for entertaining and endorsing anomalous cognition, Schooler
and colleagues argue that researchers should consider adopting a liberal
criterion for entertaining anomalous cognition while maintaining a very
strict criterion for the outright endorsement of its existence. Appreci-
ating the justifiability of polar opposite views on psi/paranormal phe-
nomena, Schooler encourage humility on both the part of those who
present evidence in support of anomalous cognition and those who
dispute the merit of its investigation (Schooler et al., 2018).
Schooler wonders whether there may be some aspects of existence
that may forever elude full scientific scrutiny. He relates two germane
examples. “Just as it may never be possible to prove objectively the
single thing we know the best, which is our subjective experience of
qualia, so it may never be possible to reproduce anomalous cognition
events with robust precision and effects” (Schooler, 2022b).
Seeking potential mechanisms for anomalous cognition or psi/
paranormal phenomena, if they were to exist, Schooler speculates that
explanations of consciousness and explanations of anomalous cognition
are going to be related. “If there is anything to anomalous cognition,” he
says, “then it has to do with unexplained aspects of the nature of con-
sciousness itself” (Schooler, 2022c).
Pondering what possible structures could explain both consciousness
and anomalous cognition, Schooler focuses on the failure of the pre-
vailing third-person perspective of material reductionism to account
adequately for the first-person experience of subjectivity, the flow of
time, and the present. While acknowledging intrinsic differences among
these three ideas, he posits a meta-perspective that experience, the flow
of time, and the unique quality of “now” might be accommodated by a
subjective dimension or dimensions of time (Schooler, 2014). This new
dimension of existence, a subjective dimension of time, would be as real
as spatial dimensions. It is this subjective dimension, Schooler posits,
that, while entirely overlooked by science, may be where the possible
realm of anomalous cognition resides as well as being an essential part of
the deep explanation of consciousness (Schooler, 2022b).
Alluding to information theory, Schooler considers how a conjoined
first-person/third-person meta-perspective could conceptualize subjec-
tivity, the present, and the flow of time within an architecture that
closely links information to an ever-changing now. Thus, “consciousness
arises via the changing informational states associated with an observer’s
movement through objective time relative to a currently unacknowledged
dimension or dimensions of subjective time” (Schooler, 2014).
Perhaps most dramatically, certainly most controversially, the exis-
tence of an additional temporal dimension could be consistent with
precognition (knowing the future), which has a vast anecdotal tradition
and a serious (if challenged) research program. Schooler asserts that
“demonstrating robust findings of precognition could inform theories of
how consciousness interfaces with time in a manner not currently
considered in modern science” (Schooler, 2014).
Given his “resonance theory” and “subjective dimension of time,”
what is Schooler’s ultimate ontology of consciousness? Wielding his
motto, “entertaining without endorsing,” he picks out panpsychism.
“The magnitude of the challenge of how consciousness exists in physical
reality, he says, invites ambitious characterizations of how it might fit.
And panpsychism, the idea that very low-level consciousnesses integrate
into higher levels, seems quite plausible” (Schooler, 2022a).
17.9. Sheldrake’s morphic fields
Parapsychologist Rupert Sheldrake proposes “morphic fields” as a
field of form or shape or organization, “such that every entity has its own
field: each ant colony, each termite nest, a flock of birds, a pack of
wolves and a herd of animals.” Social groups of people too, such as a
family, a tribe or a group, where “members of that group interact with
each other within that [morphic] field. When they go apart, that field, as
it were, stretches. It doesn’t break. The members remain connected at a
distance in a way analogous to quantum entanglement.” There is a huge
diversity of morphic fields. “Each self-organizing pattern of activity has
its own morphic field, and a kind of collective, inherent memory”
(Sheldrake, 2007a, n.d.a, n.d.b).
Morphic fields at all levels of complexity have the following char-
acteristics: They are self-organizing wholes; they have both a spatial and
a temporal aspect, and organize spatio-temporal patterns of vibratory or
rhythmic activity; they attract the systems under their influence towards
characteristic forms and patterns of activity; they are a nested hierarchy
or holarchy; they are structures of probability, and their organizing
activity is probabilistic; and they contain a built-in memory that is cu-
mulative and reinforcing (Sheldrake, n.d.b).
Sheldrake’s corollary concept of “morphic resonance” expresses this
kind of collective memory inherent in nature, the inference of similar
prior patterns of activity on subsequent similar patterns of activity—-
which, once they have occurred, can happen more easily anywhere.
Morphic resonance is rhythmic in nature, patterns of vibration in space
and time that give rise to this kind of memory. It is like a habit, he says,
which depends on memory, usually unconscious memory.
Sheldrake posits that morphogenesis in biology depends on orga-
nizing fields. As the case in point, the fields organizing the activity of the
nervous system are inherited “through morphic resonance, conveying a
collective, instinctive memory. Each individual both draws upon and
contributes to the collective memory of the species. This means that new
patterns of behavior can spread more rapidly than would otherwise be
possible.”
Unabashedly controversial and mainstream rejected, morphic fields,
Sheldrake says, underlie our mental activity and our perceptions. He
claims that the existence of these fields can be tested experimentally,
such as the sense of being stared at (a claim refuted by in-field scien-
tists.) He further claims that morphic fields of social groups “help pro-
vide an explanation for telepathy” and that “telepathy seems to be a
normal means of animal communication” (as with dogs [Sheldrake,
2011])—all of which are mainstream dismissed.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
138
Sheldrake argues that “telepathy is normal not paranormal, natural
not supernatural, and is also common between people, especially people
who know each other well,” adding, “The morphic fields of mental ac-
tivity are not confined to the insides of our heads. They extend far
beyond our brain through intention and attention”63 (Sheldrake, n.d.a,
n.d.b).
17.10. Grinberg’s syntergic/neuronal field theory
Iconoclastic neurophysiologist Jacobo Grinberg-Zylberbaum pre-
sents a psychophysiological theory of consciousness—"The syntergic
theory"— which postulates that “the human brain is able to create a
hypercomplex field of interactions that are the result of the activation of
all its neuronal elements.” He calls this interaction matrix the “neuronal
field,” and “one of the effects of its activation is the unification of
neuronal activity.” Grinberg speculates that “the neuronal field pro-
duces a distortion in the basic space-time structure and the reality of our
percepts is the perception of this distortion.” For the neuronal field to be
activated, he says, “a structure as complex as the brain is needed” and
“this field is responsible for the interactions between brains produced in
emphatic non-verbal communication.” Consciousness, he states, “is
closely connected to the neuronal field” (Grinberg-Zylberbaum, 1997).
Grinberg, who pursued fringe areas, such as shamanism, and who
vanished mysteriously at age 48, conceives of “Reality” as “an undif-
ferentiated energetic matrix” and “by means of the brain, this matrix is
converted into neuronal activity and experience.” Thus, “human expe-
rience is considered to constitute or ‘exists in’ a dimension different from
that which is related to the localized physiological activity of the brain.”
Combining “cerebral electrochemical changes and the experiences
themselves of light, sound, love, fear, etc., energetic transformations of a
qualitative nature must take place.” These hypothesized transformations
engender Grinberg’s “syntergic theory” which, he says, concerns “the
creation of experience” (Grinberg-Zylberbaum, 1981). Grinberg also
claims to support “the brain’s quantum nature at the macrolevel” by
demonstrating “transferred [evoked] potentials” between electrically
insulated subjects situated 14.5 m apart (Grinberg-Zylberbaum et al.,
1994).
Moreover, the syntergic theory postulates that the brain’s energetic
field (the neuronal field) “expands into space, interacts with the space-
matter continuum, is able to change the informational content of the
latter, and thus affects other neuronal fields and physical forces.” Ac-
cording to this theory, he says, “gravitation is a by-product of an alter-
ation in the informational content of the space-matter continuum, and
human communication is based on neuronal field interactions.” In short,
the syntergic theory considers experience as “the interaction between
the neuronal field and the energetic (syntergic) organization of space."
Grinberg claims that “this approach is the one that contemporary
physics requires in order to be able to incorporate experience into its
realm and thus expand its limits to include life and consciousness”
(Grinberg-Zylberbaum, 1982).
17.11. Graboi’s three-aspect model
Cognitive neuroscientist Daniel Graboi, motivated by telepathy and
clairvoyance being real and nonphysical, proposes a “three-aspect
model of consciousness”: matter, mind (nonphysical), and pure aware-
ness (an “absolute”). In his model, "pure awareness energy" interacts
with a brain to produce consciousness in the mind, which exists in a
nonphysical dimension of reality. The information produced by the
activation pattern of neurons in the unique wiring structure of a specific
brain dissociates and is rendered into a "pure information" format which
is universal and available nonlocally to enter the contents of con-
sciousness of any suitably receptive brain-mind (Graboi, 2023).
17.12. Near death experiences, survival, past lives
Near-death experiences (NDEs) command great popular interest but
receive only modest discussion here on the Landscape. Obviously, if
even a minuscule fraction of this vast ocean of anecdotes were actually
true, it would instantly falsify every Materialism Theory and support
(but not confirm) a host of nonphysical theories.
NDEs are out-of-the-body experiences (OBEs) that are triggered
during catastrophic physical trauma that leads to “death” in terms of
heart stoppages, and generally feature a cluster of common character-
istics: a feeling of floating above or beyond one’s body; a sense of
movement toward a bright light with a benevolent aura; a capacity to
commune with deceased loved ones; and the presence of a spiritual
Being or beings who radiate warmth and love (whose names or traits
vary according to the religion or culture of the NDE experiencer). NDEs
have been recorded throughout history and across cultures, often asso-
ciated with mystical traditions.
Of all the requests we receive from viewers of Closer To Truth, NDEs
surely rank first, and survival/past lives probably second. My response
goes something like this: “I have followed NDE accounts, both experi-
encers/advocates and skeptics/debunkers, but I do not find sufficient
depth and diversity, beyond the obvious confirming enthusiasm of the
former and the obvious denying critique of the latter, to warrant the
kind of explorations we do on Closer To Truth. We are not in the business
of adjudicating claims of NDEs and survival/past lives (as we are not
with ESP). What we do is to explore the implications or ramifications of
such claims, if they would be true, from an ontological perspective and
with critical thinking (which CTT does with ESP).” (For a pioneering and
exploratory exception, Closer To Truth features the experimental work of
Sam Parnia, a medical scientist who explores NDEs under a new name,
“Recalled Experiences of Death [Parnia et al., 2022; Parnia, 2014].)
While popular accounts of NDEs, such as Eben Alexander’s Proof of
Heaven: A Neurosurgeon’s Journey into the Afterlife, have widespread
impact, they are generally not taken seriously by the scientific or med-
ical communities (Alexander, 2014). Quite apart from the blizzard of
anecdotal accounts, there have been scientific studies of NDEs, survival
and past lives. Most notable, perhaps, is the work of the Division of
Perceptual Studies (DOPS) at the University of Virginia School of Med-
icine, which claims to have documented thousands of cases. Founded by
Dr. Ian Stevenson and advanced by Dr. Bruce Greyson, DOPS strives to
challenge the “entrenched mainstream view by rigorously evaluating
empirical evidence suggesting that consciousness survives death and
that mind and brain are distinct and separable” and that science needs
“to accommodate genuine spiritual experiences without loss of scientific
integrity” (DOPS, n.d.; 17.13).
The Bigelow Institute for Consciousness Studies (BICS) was founded
to support research into the survival of human consciousness after
physical death. (Bigelow, 2023). BICS’s essay contest to “present evi-
dence beyond reasonable doubt,” as if in a court of law, “for the survival
of consciousness after permanent physical death (‘life after death,’ or
‘the afterlife’)” attracted 204 essays and produced 29 winners.”64
Jeffrey Mishlove, the host of a long-running TV and web series New/
Thinking Aloud, who has a PhD in Parapsychology from Berkeley, won
BICS first prize for his comprehensive presentation of the pro-survival
arguments. He begins by pointing out that “a belief in postmortem
survival of consciousness is common to every culture, nationality, reli-
gion, and linguistic group in every region and historical period on Earth.
Every single one!” For example, American belief in life after death has
63 Sheldrake claims that controlled experiments anticipating phone calls and
emails validate his claims; many scientists disagree, citing faulty or inadequate
experimental design. Sheldrake’s technical papers are on his website: https
://www.sheldrake.org/research (Sheldrake, n.d.a).
64 All 29 Bigelow winning essays are here: https://www.bigelowinstitute.org/
index.php/essay-contest/.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
139
been stable for 75 years at over 70%, even while religious affiliation has
been dropping. Mishlove’s best evidence for postmortem survival is the
big picture of what he says are nine largely independent categories “all
pointing to postmortem consciousness:” near-death experience; after-
death communications; reincarnation cases; peak in Darian experiences
(visions of dead people who are not known at the time to be dead);
instrumental trans communication (electronic devices for communica-
tion with the deceased; xenoglossy (the ability to converse in a language
one has never learned); possession; mental mediumship; and physical
mediumship (Mishlove, 2021).
Dr. Pim van Lommel, a cardiologist, won BICS second prize for his
reporting on recent scientific research on NDEs, especially in survivors
of cardiac arrest, with “strikingly similar results and conclusions.” His
claim is that NDEs seem “to be an authentic experience which cannot be
simply reduced to imagination, fear of death, hallucination, psychosis,
the use of drugs, or oxygen deficiency.” Using examples of nonlocal
consciousness beyond the brain, for instance during a period when the
brain is either non-functioning or malfunctioning, he argues that “there
are now good reasons to assume that our consciousness does not always
coincide with the functioning of our brain: enhanced or nonlocal con-
sciousness can sometimes be experienced separately from the body.”
The general conclusion of scientific research on NDE, he says, “is indeed
that our enhanced consciousness does not reside in our brain and is not
limited to our brain. Our consciousness seems to be nonlocal, and our
brain facilitates rather than produces the experience of that conscious-
ness.” He concludes that “death, like birth, may be a mere passing from
one state of consciousness into another” (Van Lommel, 2022).
One intriguing parapsychological critique of NDE survival stories is
“super-psi” or “living agent psi” where information is gleaned via
telepathy or clairvoyance not by post-mortem communications, a posi-
tion affirmed by Braude (1992) and denied by Mishlove (2021).
There are of course many physicalist, physiological and psycholog-
ical critiques of NDEs, OBEs, life-after-death stories, and all the survival
arguments; such critiques are widely available. While oxygen depriva-
tion has been a common explanation for NDEs, more sophisticated
analysis suggests “a sort of blending of conscious states: waking, rapid-
eye movement (REM) sleep and non-REM sleep.” Neurologist Kevin
Nelson posits, “The physiological balance between conscious states is
disrupted during the conditions of near-death, leading the brainstem
arousal system controlling conscious states to blend waking and rapid
eye movement consciousness into a hybrid state known as REM intru-
sion … [and] REM intrusion leads to many key features of near-death,
including lying still, visual activation, out-of-body, and the experience’s
narrative qualities” (Freeman, 2023).
That NDEs are being taken more seriously by the scientific commu-
nity was evidenced by a conference held by The New York Academy of
Sciences, “Explorations in Consciousness: Death, Psychedelics, and
Mystical Experience.” Participants describe NDEs, which are sometimes
called periods of “disconnected consciousness,” as surprisingly com-
mon—according to one report, “15 percent of intensive care unit pa-
tients and up to 23 percent of survivors of cardiac arrest reported having
had one” (Freeman, 2023).
The claim is that because more people survive cardiac arrests—due
to substantially improved resuscitation techniques—more NDEs are re-
ported and the field has emerged as a legitimate one for scientific in-
quiry. That NDEs can be emotionally transformative provides
opportunity to examine mental health issues, both the positive feelings
of enhanced compassion or purpose and the negative after-effects of bad
dreams and persistent intrusive thoughts. Calling evolutionary expla-
nations for NDEs “just-so stories,” Christof Koch said, “They may be true.
They may be false. It just doesn’t matter. But the fact that we do have
[these] experiences—that is the remarkable thing” (Freeman, 2023).
The fact that some NDE experiencers describe a reduced fear of death
does not ipso facto mean, obviously, that death is any less physically
final and that consciousness is any less entirely material. Moreover, it is
difficult to imagine what kinds of observations or experiments could
count as scientifically dispositive that NDEs confirm post-mortem
survival.
17.13. DOPS’s consciousness research and theory
The Division of Perceptual Studies (DOPS), a research unit within the
Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioral Sciences at the Univer-
sity of Virginia, has contributed both empirically and conceptually to
emerging nonphysical theories of consciousness, which picture mind as
irreducible and grounded in some sort of highest consciousness which
forms the ontological foundation of reality as a whole. DOPS cognitive
scientist/parapsychologist Ed Kelly contends that “the limitations of
contemporary mainstream consciousness theorizing derive from the
systematic unwillingness of the physicalist camp to take difficult
empirical phenomena such as psi and mystical experience into account”
(DOPS, n.d.; Kelly, 2024).
DOPS was founded in 1967 by psychiatrist Ian Stevenson and has
been dedicated to research related to the possibility of postmortem
survival. According to Kelly, “Survival is a watershed issue theoretically,
in that demonstration of its occurrence as an empirical reality would
immediately rule out most if not quite all of the materialism theories.
Clearly, if the prevailing physicalist ‘production’ model of mind-brain
relations is correct in claiming that mind and consciousness are manu-
factured entirely by neurophysiological processes occurring in brains,
then it follows logically and inescapably that postmortem survival is
impossible, period” (DOPS, n.d.; Kelly, 2024).
DOPS staff have published hundreds of research papers in refereed
journals, plus over a score of books, on reincarnation, near-death ex-
periences (NDEs) and other survival-related topics such as crisis appa-
ritions, mediumship, and after-death communications (DOPS, website).
Stevenson himself was the primary architect of a major project involving
small children who begin at a very early age to speak and act as though
they are remembering, or expressing behaviorally, potentially verifiable
events that took place in the life of a recently deceased person. Most
interestingly are the relatively few cases in which the child’s statements
and behaviors were well documented before the previous personality
(PP) was identified. Stevenson found “cases of the reincarnation type”
(CORT) everywhere he looked, primarily but not exclusively in socio-
cultural settings where their occurrence is not unexpected. He and
various colleagues have so far investigated over 2500 cases, around
2000 of which have been deemed of sufficient quality to merit laborious
encoding of associated variables for inclusion in a cumulative database.
Systematic properties include a very high proportion of violent or pre-
mature death in the PPs, which, DOPS researchers speculate, might
relate to why some children remember but others do not. Other findings
include confusions surrounding gender in children who report memories
of a life as a person of the opposite sex. Stevenson paid special attention
to a subset of over 200 cases in which the child displays birthmarks or
birth defects, often extremely unusual in form, corresponding to fatal
injuries suffered by the PP (Stevenson, 1997).
Another major line of research, spearheaded by psychiatrist Bruce
Greyson, has focused on NDEs. Greyson and colleagues have investi-
gated a large number of such cases and created a second DOPS database
containing over a thousand what they consider good cases. Of special
interest are the hundreds of cases in which NDEs have occurred under
extreme physiological conditions such as deep general anesthesia and/
or cardiac arrest, conditions in which almost all contemporary neuro-
scientists would expect that patients should report no conscious expe-
rience whatsoever, let alone the most meaningful and transformative
experiences of their lives—in effect, mystical experiences occurring
under life-threatening conditions. Numerous physiological explanations
have been offered for NDEs, but none, DOPS argues, can withstand
scrutiny (Greyson et al., 2009).
Of particular interest here is the DOPS theoretical work opposing
physicalism, led by Ed Kelly and involving fifty or so scholars from
diverse academic disciplines (over a period of more than two decades).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
140
Motivated by DOPS’s empirical studies, DOPS’s theorizing in regard to
the mind/brain relationship and consciousness are presented in three
books. The first is Irreducible Mind, which describes various psycho-
physical phenomena that appear difficult or impossible to explain in
conventional physicalist terms. These include psi and survival data,
along with other non-standard empirical phenomena such as stigmata
and hypnotically induced blisters; prodigious forms of memory and
calculation; psychological automatisms and hidden or secondary centers
of consciousness; near-death and out-of-body experiences, emphasizing
experiences occurring under extreme physiological conditions; genius-
level creativity such as that of the Indian mathematician Ramanujan;
and mystical experiences, whether spontaneous, pharmacologically
induced, or occurring in conjunction with transformative practices such
as an intense meditative discipline of some sort (Kelly et al., 2007).
The main import of Irreducible Mind, apart from its systematic
empirical attack on physicalism, Kelly says, is to marshal support for a
model of the human psyche advanced by F. W.H. Myers and developed
philosophically by William James. Contrary to today’s prevailing
conception, which views everyday consciousness as the only con-
sciousness, generated entirely by physiological processes in the nervous
system, the Myers/James picture includes at least one level of normally
hidden and more comprehensive consciousness that exists indepen-
dently of the organism and is equipped with “adits and operations” of its
own which provide access to wider and deeper parts of the reality in
which we find ourselves embedded (Myers, 1903).
According to Kelly, this sort of “permission” or “transmission” or
“filter” model of the psyche (James, 1900), in which everyday con-
sciousness takes forms dependent on interactions between a more in-
clusive and capacious consciousness and an organism that serves mainly
as a sensorimotor interface, may initially sound strange to our modern
ears, but, Kelly argues, “there is now a lot of evidence to support it.” It
also has strong affinities to views advanced by Bergson (17.1), Jung
(17.2), and the Indian philosophical tradition with its “subtle” mental
and physical worlds interposed between everyday experience and an
ultimate consciousness of some sort (16.1, 16.7, 16.9, 16.10, 16.13).
Ongoing research seeks to identify conditions in the mind and body that
encourage what Myers termed “subliminal uprush”, or expression in
everyday consciousness of information and capacities normally confined
to James’s hidden “More”—for example, using functional neuroimaging
techniques for research on meditation and psychedelics.
The second book, Beyond Physicalism, is more explicitly theoretical,
seeking to identify alternative conceptual frameworks, or worldviews,
or metaphysical systems, that could permit the psi or paranormal
empirical phenomena catalogued in the first book to occur. These
include a range of theories: a modernized form of interactive dualism
(15.8); process philosophy (13.12); quantum theories of Henry Stapp
(11.2), Harald Atmanspacher (14.7), Bernard Carr (11.10); mystically-
informed philosophies such as those of the Neoplatonists, Samkhya/
Yoga, and Kashmiri Shaivism, and Western philosophical figures
including Leibniz, Peirce, and Whitehead (Kelly et al., 2015).
Kelly argues that the central tendency is toward some sort of Idealism
(16), most likely of the type known as (evolutionary) panentheism
(Hartshorne and Reese, 2000). Kelly stresses that “The precise form that
an adequate theory will take is powerfully constrained by the need for it
to incorporate or at least respect the discoveries of modern physics,
making it an objective or realist idealism as opposed to a subjective
idealism of the sort advocated by Bishop Berkeley.” Several of Kelly’s
collaborators—Federico Faggin (11.12), Bernard Carr (11.10), and
Bernardo Kastrup (16.4)—are explicitly working in this direction, as is
Mira Albahari (16.13) from the perspective of Indian idealisms. All such
theories, Kelly points out, can potentially make room not only for
“rogue” phenomena such as psi and survival, genius, and mystical
experience, but also for experiences of value, meaning and purpose so
vital to real human life. Conversely, Kelly believes that these meta-
physical frameworks imply “poor prospects for artificial general intelli-
gence and virtual immortality” (Kelly, 2024).
The third book, Consciousness Unbound (Kelly and Marshall, 2021),
has three parts. The first part is empirical, summarizing the state--
of-the-science for precognition, NDEs, and CORT. The second part pre-
sents additional non-physicalist conceptual frameworks, including those
of Max Velmans (14.3), Bernardo Kastrup and Federico Faggin. The
third part explores implications of the emerging theoretical picture for
consciousness research, the humanities, and the current landscape of
mind/brain metaphysics.
17.14. Bitbol’s phenomenological ontology
Philosopher of science Michel Bitbol suggests that a radical view of
neurophenomenology (9.6.5) amplifies “the available range of in-
terpretations of altered states of consciousness, from OBEs and NDEs to
meditation and psychedelics, and which may suggest a new ontological
category. There are generally three such interpretations, he says: “two
objectivist-realist and one non-committal (mild) phenomenological
interpretation.” According to the objectivist-realist approaches, he says,
“these states refer to worldly or other-worldly objective processes. They
refer either to an alteration of the brain’s biochemical balance, thus
giving rise to hallucinations, or to a backstage supernatural (but ‘real’)
world which discloses itself to (say) dying people.”
In contrast, Bitbol says, “according to the non-committal phenome-
nological approach, instead, these states are relevant by themselves, as
transformative experiences for those who live through them.” This latter
approach, advocated by Evan Thompson as well as by Bitbol, take “a
decisive step beyond the sterile conflict between naturalism and super-
naturalism. It shows that despite their superficial disagreement, both
positions share the same crucial but disputable strategy: escaping one’s
own lived embodied situation and striving towards some (natural or
super-natural) transcendent realm of being” (Bitbol, 2015; Thompson,
2014).
Bitbol sees a big vision here. “But the clarifying role of phenome-
nology is not bound to stop at this point. One can take further advantage
of a truly radical phenomenological approach, and thereby endow the
transformative experiences with additional significance. According to
Merleau-Ponty (who partly agreed with Heidegger and Sartre on this
point), phenomenology, in its mature state, becomes a new form of
ontology: not a straightforward ontology of things facing an observer,
however, but an ‘oblique ontology’ of intertwining with what there is
(Saint Aubert, 2006); not an ontology of manifest beings, but an
ontology of self-manifesting being. As Merleau-Ponty writes, radical
phenomenology does not yield a standard ‘exo-ontology,’ but rather an
unexplored ‘endo-ontology.’ Merleau-Ponty here unambiguously al-
ludes to an ontology expressed from the innermost recesses of the pro-
cess of being, rather than to an ontology of the external contemplation of
beings” (Bitbol, 2015).
This granted, Bitbol argues, “some altered states of consciousness can
be understood neither dismissively as illusions, nor neutrally as
enthralling experiences, but positively as revealing a state of being
which happens to be hidden by intellectual fabrications and by the
impulse of intentional directedness.” Here, to avoid misunderstandings,
Bitbol clarifies that “unlike in super-naturalism, there is no question
here of reaching some remote domain of transcendent being, but only of
self-disclosing an exquisitely proximate mode of being, which is
permanently present but usually neglected: perhaps what Tibetan
Dzogchen practitioners call ‘the nature of mind,’ which, in this non-
dualist context, is likely to be simultaneously the (self-experienced)
nature of being” (Bitbol, 2015).
17.15. Campbell’s theory of everything
Consciousness researcher (and former nuclear physicist) Thomas
Campbell presents “My Big TOE,” his theory of everything: “Con-
sciousness is the fundamental reality. The physical world is an illusion, a
virtual reality that only exists in our minds. We are Individuated Units of
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
141
Consciousness: immortal, interconnected parts of a Larger Conscious-
ness System. We choose to be players in the virtual reality game called
life on Earth, set in a virtual universe computed by the system to aid our
consciousness evolution.… Our goal: to learn from the outcomes of our
choices in order to grow up and evolve the quality of our consciousness
from fear to love. By evolving our individual consciousness quality from
one round of the game to the next, we advance the evolution of the
entire consciousness system” (Section: Campbell, 2003/2007, n.d.).
Rejecting Dualism, Materialism and Idealism, Campbell claims all
questions and objections are answered and resolved “if we conceive of
the physical universe as a virtual reality,” the core idea of My Big TOE.
Moreover, My Big TOE “provides entirely rational explanations for many
phenomena dismissed by mainstream science as ‘weird’ (quantum ef-
fects), ‘mysterious’ (consciousness), ‘illusory’ (free will) or ‘delusions’
(paranormal experiences).” For example, paranormal phenomena are
natural artifacts of a virtual universe.
As for the hard problem of consciousness, it is supposedly “sol-
ved—or rather, dissolved—once we drop our belief in a fundamental
external reality.” The virtual reality model helps us do that, Campbell
says. In this view, “our subjective perception is not some ‘internal’
representation of an ‘external’ world: There is no objective world
outside of us.”
But if our reality is a simulation, who or what is doing the simu-
lating? Is this not just kicking all the conundrums, such as consciousness,
up a level? My Big TOE is ready with a “Larger Consciousness System”
(LCS) that computes virtual realities, noting, unlike the God of religions,
LCS “demands neither praise nor worship.”
In the very beginning, Campbell’s big conjecture goes, “all that may
have existed was an Absolute Unbounded Oneness (AUO)—an undif-
ferentiated, elementary consciousness with a potential to evolve into the
highly complex, unfathomably vast LCS of today. AUO was barely
aware, but it did have the potential to develop all the attributes of
consciousness, including awareness, perception, cognition and free-will
choice-making.”
Driven, somehow, by an inherent drive towards complexity, “when
AUO reached its evolutionary limits as a monolithic block of con-
sciousness, a single source of choosing, it made a crucial decision: AUO
split itself into unfathomably many interconnected but autonomous
pieces, a process we can imagine like partitioning a computer hard drive
into multiple partitions. The idea was for all the different pieces to build
something more innovative and creative than a single mind would ever
be able to come up with.” At that fateful moment, Campbell says, “the
One became the Many: the Absolute Unbounded Oneness (AUO) turned
into an Absolute Unbounded Manifold (AUM),” which led to the genesis
of the Larger Consciousness System,” which provides, according to My
Big TOE, the simulations of our virtual universe today (Campbell, 2003/
2007, n.d.).
17.16. Hiller’s eternal discarnate consciousness
Maverick physicist Jack Hiller posits an “eternal discarnate con-
sciousness” or, as he says, in common parlance, the “soul”—which,
“when freed from its hard attachment to the body, functions in a Uni-
versal Field of Consciousness (UFC) which may also be characterized as
the mind of God.” The soul brings to the body the moral values that exist
in the UFC and these values may often conflict with, in Hiller’s Freudian
terms, “the Id and the Ego’s pleasure-seeking functions.” (Hiller, 2021).
The theory hypothesizes that the individual consciousness (spirit and
soul) functions in this UFC, both in life and in eternity, before and after
an Earth life (Hiller, 2019).
Hiller bases his theory on what he says are many thousands of out-of-
body experiences (OBEs) associated with near-death experiences,
including many documented cases in which researchers were able to
verify accurate reporting about the activities observed during the OBE
that could not be accounted for by normal sense-perception (Rivas et al.,
2023). He stresses OBEs’ peculiar, nonphysical characteristics: time no
longer has meaning, does not flow, and the past and present, even some
future events, are available to see and experience; visits may be made to
Earth locations distant from the body, or out to the cosmos; perception is
radically enhanced, e.g., visual perception is 360◦, with an ability to
focus down to atomic particles or up to the cosmos; everything appears
to be made of light; thinking and movement by thinking are instanta-
neous; all entities, inanimate as well as diverse animate, exude con-
sciousness; individual consciousness, souls, connect telepathically; the
world experienced is multidimensional, more than space-time; by
existing in the universal field of consciousness, all knowledge is felt as
available, and one feels part of God and God’s love for all (Hiller, 2020).
Hiller speculates that if quantum entanglement can be conceptualized as
some kind of signaling at infinite speed across any distances, there could
be a deep relationship between quantum mechanics and reported in-
stances of discarnate consciousness.
17.17. Harp’s universal or God consciousness
Physicist and “spiritual scholar” Dennis Harp, who seeks to unify
theoretical physics and spiritual teachings, claims that “each of us exists
as consciousness attached to a mind and body, making sense of the
universe by experiencing individual states in a causal sequence.” Moti-
vated by a personal NDE as well as NDE research, Harp asserts that with
contemplative practices, we can learn (eventually) “to detach from the
body and explore the universe in a non-physical manner. Finally, we
detach from the mind as well, and experience the entire universe at once
in the shared view called Universal, or God Consciousness. Thus, what
we call consciousness is somehow the union of this Universal or God
Consciousness with our mind and body (Harp, 2022).
To Harp, theoretical physics “is comfortable with the possibility of
the infinite complexity of infinite universes, along with universal
waveform collapse and reinflation every instant in order to explain
causality.” However, he says, “causality is only necessary as long as the
mind is interpreting, or ‘making sense’ of the universe. Since con-
sciousness can experience the universe independent of the mind, beyond
the realm of space and time, it experiences all quantum mechanical
states simultaneously, and no interactions occur at all. This static uni-
verse unifies theoretical physics and mystical teachings” (Harp, 2022).
17.18. Swimme’s cosmogenesis
Mathematician and integral studies professor Brian Swimme pre-
sents the cosmology of a creative universe—cosmogenesis—in which
human consciousness plays an essential role. He views the evolution of
the universe toward greater complexity and consciousness as “the ulti-
mate aim of the universe.” It is a creative universe that develops through
time from plasma to galaxies to living planets to human consciousness,
“a universe that can intend something even before human consciousness
emerges” (Swimme, 2022).
Swimme bases his ideas on the teachings of Thomas Berry, a Catholic
priest, cultural historian, and world religion scholar, who spoke of “the
spirituality of the universe,” using “the word ‘spirituality’ to correct a
deformation in modern consciousness, that imagined the existence of a
‘physical universe.’” Such a conception no longer made sense, Berry
said, because in the 20th century, “we discovered that the matter of this
universe—the only matter we know of—constructs life. There is no such
thing, then, as ‘lifeless matter.’ Matter, in its very structure and dyna-
mism, generates life.” Consciousness, then, is built into the fundamental
fabric of the universe. What will happen, Swimme asks, “when we turn
our consciousness around and realize that our awareness of cosmo-
genesis is also the work of the universe? How will we change when we
face the universe and find the universe facing us?” (Swimme, 2022).
17.19. Langan’s cognitive-theoretic model of the universe
Independent thinker, autodidact Christopher Langan claims that
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
142
what he calls the "Cognitive-Theoretic Model of the Universe" (CTMU)
provides the logical framework of a true “Theory of Everything.” It ex-
plains "the connection between mind and reality” (note “cognition” and
“universe” in the same phrase); and “proves the existence of God [as
defined], the soul, and an afterlife” (Langan, 2024).
CTMU posits information as the most fundamental constituents of
reality. The universe is a vast arrangement of digital information and the
mathematical relationships between them. At the same time, “it is only
through consciousness that we can perceive or know anything at all.
Thus, our reality can just as well be conceived as a vast network of
conscious experiences: perceptions and the laws which govern them.”
Because there is nothing outside reality, reality must contain all of the
conditions necessary for its own existence, and given sufficient time,
“even mere possibility is enough to ensure that it generates itself”
(Section: CTMU Wiki, n.d.).
Although this kind of mind, which Langan calls God’s mind, “sits in
knowledge of itself in an unchanging, eternal way, it contains within it
all of the processes required for it to refine itself into existence out of
nothingness.” It is here, according to CTMU, that “consciousness is
stratified: the bottom stratum is the all-knowing mind of God,” within
which “all of the more superficial strata of consciousness” are contained.
From God’s perspective, God “is aware of all the steps in its own crea-
tion.” However, from the perspective of these more superficial strata—of
which our human minds are pieces—the universe appears as a physical
entity unfolding in physical space. But because “our conscious minds are
contained within God’s consciousness … we retain the creative power
and freedom of God on a scale that is localized in time and space.”
CTMU describes reality as “a Self-Configuring Self-Processing Lan-
guage, a reflexive intrinsic language characterized not only by self-
reference and recursive self-definition, but by full self-configuration and
self-execution” (Langan, 2002). Embedding issues of absolute morality
and karma, “if we choose to act in a way that is in line with the telos,
those parts of our minds that match the mind of God get preserved and
we basically move closer to the all-knowing substratum, or the con-
sciousness of God. If we act against the telos, what happens may be that
those elements of our minds that do not match the mind of God get
recycled endlessly until they properly refine themselves.”
In short, CTMU’s reality “is a self-refining informational system
which, due to its form, cannot NOT exist. Even if there is nothingness,
this system will exist and know itself and all of the localized conscious
minds within its creation process will experience its informational
structure as real, physical, etc. It is thus self-creating, as it requires
nothing outside of itself to exist” (CTMU Wiki, n.d.).
17.20. Meditation and the brain
The scientific consciousness community generally recognizes that
meditation can provide insights into consciousness, at least enriching
descriptions. But our question goes deeper: Can meditation help discern
the fundamental nature or essence of consciousness?
Deep meditation, especially as practiced by Eastern traditions, is an
altered state of consciousness that induces changes in the brain. Studies
show that meditation, if done regularly, can help relieve symptoms of
chronic pain (Trafton, 2011); and that mindfulness meditation programs
have moderate evidence of improved anxiety and depression as well as
pain relief65 (Goyal et al, 2014). What is happening in the brain?
Studies suggest that alpha waves (~7–14 Hz), which are modulated
in primary sensory cortex during selective attention, have a mechanistic
role in perception. During “mindfulness” meditation, a common practice
requiring sustained attention to body and breath-related sensations,
people were better able to control their alpha rhythms, thereby impli-
cating “this form of enhanced dynamic neural regulation in the behav-
ioral effects of meditative practice” (Kerr et al., 2011). The idea is that
alpha waves help suppress irrelevant or distracting sensory information,
diminishing the likelihood that extraneous stimuli “will grab your
attention” and enhancing the likelihood that you can better focus and
“better regulate how things that arise will impact you” (Trafton, 2011).
In the highest meditative state possible in Theravada Bud-
dhism—nirodha-sam¯apatti, translated roughly as “the cessation of
thought and feeling”—overall brain synchronization is reduced. This
means that while during normal consciousness different parts of the
brain are communicating predictively with other parts, during nirodha-
sam¯apatti (i.e., the deepest trance-retreat into the mind, an utter absence
of sensation and awareness, with all mental activity temporarily sus-
pended), the brain is desynchronized, no longer functioning as an in-
tegrated unit. (Interestingly, similar brain desynchronization occurs
when people are given anesthetic doses of propofol or ketamine, but not
during sleep) (Love, 2023).
It is clear that meditation, which alters consciousness, also alters
specific brain wave patterns, thereby giving support to various Materi-
alism Theories (e.g., Brain Circuits and Cycles Models, 9.2.11, and
Electromagnetic Field Theories, 9.3). Moreover, the brain desynchro-
nization that accompanies the cessation of consciousness seems to sup-
port Global Workspace Theory (9.2.3), because the brain activity seems
no longer in the same sense “global,” and Integrated Information Theory
(12.), because the brain seems no longer in the same sense “integrated.”
Obviously, these results do not disprove nonphysical theories of con-
sciousness, which could be consistent with this same set of facts.
17.21. Psychedelic theories of consciousness
Throughout human history, psychedelics have been used for spiritual
purposes by inducing altered conscious experiences dramatically
different from the norm. Colors explode. Time slows, speeds up, stops.
Self shatters, dissolves. Magical creatures emerge. Spirit Beings appear.
All is alive. All is connected. All is One. Some attribute the advent of
religion to the use of psychotomimetic or hallucinogenic substances in
rituals. In each culture or condition, interpretations of psychedelic ex-
periences were made. Mystics conjoined with cosmic consciousness.
Indigenous traditions communed with sentient beings from spirit
worlds. Aldous Huxley saw the source of all mysticism and spirituality,
which he developed into the “perennial philosophy,” related to psy-
chedelics. Psychedelic missionaries in the 1960s sought short-cut in-
sights into consciousness (Philosophy of psychedelics, 2023).
Materialists like Sam Harris argue for a naturalized spirituality (Explo-
rations in Consciousness: Death Psychedelics and Mystical Experience,
2023).
There is much to be gained from psychedelic research. Not included,
as I see it now, is independent support for non-materialist theories of
consciousness. No matter how connected, spiritual or other worldly
psychedelic experiences may seem, no matter how intense the sense of
“Oneness with ultimate reality” may be, it is hard to imagine how psy-
chedelic experiences could unlock the door to new external realities, any
more than how seeing stars from a blow to the head could open the
window to new vistas of the world. Other arguments perhaps can, but
psychedelic arguments probably can’t. (Metzinger describes the psy-
chedelic experience as "epistemically vacuous" [Metzinger, 2004]. But
see Kastrup, 2024.)
The best one could claim is that psychedelic or hallucinogenic visions
would be “consistent with” nonphysical theories of consciousness. On
the other hand, psychedelic research may well selectively advance
65 Note: Meditation is not a panacea; it did no better than any active treatment
(i.e., drugs, exercise, and other behavioral therapies) on positive mood, atten-
tion, substance use, eating habits, sleep, and weight; the meta-analysis also
showed low evidence of improved stress/distress and mental health–related
quality of life (Goyal et al, 2014).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
143
various Materialism Theories of consciousness, of which there are
many.66 (Not a few viewers of Closer To Truth have advised me: “If you
really want to get ‘closer to truth,’ you really need to go psychedelic.”)
Psychedelic drugs “induce drastic changes in subjective experience,
and provide a unique opportunity to study the neurobiological basis of
consciousness” (Herzog et al 2023). By administering psychedelic drugs
to disrupt how the brain perceives and models the world while we’re
awake, researchers seek to understand how the conscious brain works
(Can psychedelic drugs, 2022). In other words, assessing the neural
mechanisms of how psychedelic drugs alter consciousness might provide
clues to the neural basis of normal consciousness. For example, LSD and
ketamine, though targeting separate brain receptors, induce similar
neural oscillation patterns across the brain, indicating synchronized
neural behavior. Such “synchronized neural activity might be more
linked to the psychedelic experience than the activity of individual
neurons” (Psychedelics Sync Neurons, 2023). If so, this distinction could
support Electromagnetic Field Theories (9.3).
Carhart-Harris and Friston formulate a theory of psychedelic action
by integrating Friston’s free-energy principle (9.5.4) and Carhart-Har-
ris’s entropic brain hypothesis (9.5.6). They call this formulation
“relaxed beliefs under psychedelics (REBUS) and the anarchic brain, and
it is founded on the principle that—via their entropic effect on sponta-
neous cortical activity—psychedelics work to relax the precision of high-
level priors or beliefs, thereby liberating bottom-up information flow,
particularly via intrinsic sources such as the limbic system” (Carhar-
t-Harris and Friston, 2019).
Psychedelic drugs have been shown to trigger altered states of con-
sciousness similar to those seen in people experiencing near-death ex-
periences (NDEs). Clinical evidence indicates that psychoactive agents
can reduce emotional distress in terminally ill people, much as NDEs do
after cardiac arrests. Dr. Anthony Bossis showed that “a single treatment
with psilocybin—a psychoactive compound found in some mushroom
species that humans have consumed for thousands of years—brought
rapid reductions in depression, anxiety, and hopelessness in people with
terminal cancer.” The benefits of psilocybin treatment, he said, were
greatest among individuals who reported strong mystical experiences
during the sessions. “The more robust that mystical experience, the
greater the outcome in terms of reduction of depression,” Dr. Bossis said.
“These aren’t NDEs,” he added, “but they’re deathlike experiences with
a similar phenomenology” (Freeman, 2023).
Psychedelic experiences can have profound impact on belief systems,
especially regarding religion, philosophy and ultimate reality (Carhar-
t-Harris and Friston, 2019). Even a single such experience can catalyze a
radical transformation. Moreover, a single belief-changing psychedelic
experience is said to be associated with increased attribution of con-
sciousness to living and non-living entities, even a sense that everything
is alive (Nayak and Griffiths, 2022). This seems a significant result for
the construction of belief systems, although any implications for theories
of consciousness per se would be at best indirect.
For a perspective more open-minded than mine, philosopher Sarah
Lane Richie reports that “emerging scientific and philosophical research
on psychedelics … has attracted a growing body of philosophical and
theological work on the metaphysical and epistemological possibilities
of such experiences.” She discusses “the epistemic status of psychedelic
experiences,” suggesting “there exists a mutually reinforcing relation-
ship between panpsychism and the metaphysical possibility of a verid-
ical interpretation of psychedelic states” (Richie, 2021).
As noted, I have a strong predisposition to dismiss any notion that
psychedelics reveal any sort of veridical reality. Insights about brain-
mind mechanisms, sure, but no ontological unveilings. Richie and also
philosopher Peter Sj¨ostedt-Hughes, who focuses on psychedelics and
consciousness/metaphysics, put a hairline fracture in my bone-strength
worldview.
Sj¨ostedt-Hughes proposes that “Metaphysics should be used to inte-
grate and understand psychedelic-induced metaphysical experiences.”
(This is not a tautology, he rightly states.) He argues that “there is a
potential extra benefit to patients in psychedelic-assisted therapy if they
are provided with an optional, additional, and intelligible schema and
discussion of metaphysical options at the integrative phase of the ther-
apy.” (He offers a “metaphysical matrix” with five columns—Physi-
calism Idealism, Dualism, Monism, Transcendent—and two special
rows, Panpsychism and Theism.) (Sj¨ostedt-Hughes, 2023).
Sj¨ostedt-Hughes presents his case. “If the mind-matter relation is an
unresolved problem, then psychedelic induced intuitions and visions of
alternate frameworks of reality within which to see this problem should
not be immediately dismissed as mere hallucination. We cannot judge
what is hallucinatory if we do not know what is real. Thus, the hard
problem of consciousness bears directly upon the hard problem of psy-
chedelic consciousness—the problem of determining the truth or delu-
sion of certain psychedelic experiences.” He asks, “whether psychedelic
experiences are conditioned by one’s culture or whether they decondition
one from one’s culture into a transcendent state.” He concludes, “the
experiences that psychedelics can occasion might not be mere delusion
but may hold true insights about the nature of ourselves and the cosmos
of which we are parts” (Sj¨ostedt-Hughes, 2022).
About ourselves? I agree totally. About the cosmos? I remain almost
totally skeptical (but no longer totally skeptical).
Psychedelic experiences are well worth researching, phenomeno-
logically and neurobiologically. But I’m not waiting for psychedelic
breakthroughs in discerning the ultimate theory of consciousness.
Granted, according to psychedelic researchers Yaden et al., “psychedelic
substances produce unusual and compelling changes in conscious
experience,” which “have prompted some to propose that psychedelics
may provide unique insights explaining the nature of consciousness.”
Yet, they say, “At present, psychedelics, like other current scientific tools
and methods, seem unlikely to provide information relevant to the so-
called ‘hard problem of consciousness’” (Yaden, 2021) (Could psyche-
delics, however, shed light on the nature of subjectivity and selfhood,
which are indirectly related to the hard problem?) The authors are
optimistic that psychedelic research can help solve “multiple ‘easy
problems of consciousness,’ which involve relations between subjec-
tivity, brain function, and behavior.” They conclude by calling for
“epistemic humility” (Yaden, 2021)—which is sage advice for everyone
working on consciousness, present company included.
18. Challenge theories
The eight “Challenge Theories” that follow portray the profound
depth and perhaps intractability of the mind-body problem. They are
long on diagnosing the explanatory disease—largely fallacies of mate-
rialism theories of mind—but short on offering prescriptive solutions.
They are long on hearty speculation, short on confident conclusions.
They are important signposts or benchmarks on the Landscape of Con-
sciousness, and appropriately, they come last, part of the take-away
message.
18.1. Nagel’s mind and cosmos
Philosopher Thomas Nagel famously shook up the philosophy of
mind with his seminal article, “What is It Like to be a Bat?” He begins
66 In recent years, mainstream medicine has transformed psychedelic research
into a legalized, innovative field, both for the treatment of mental health and
neurological disorders and for explorations of consciousness. In 2000, the Johns
Hopkins Center for Psychedelic and Consciousness Research became the first to
obtain regulatory approval in the United States to reinitiate research with
psychedelics in healthy, psychedelic-naive volunteers (Johns Hopkins Center)
(https://hopkinspsychedelic.org). Another example is the New York Academy
of Sciences conference, “Explorations in Consciousness: Death, Psychedelics,
and Mystical Experience” (2023)—https://events.nyas.org/event/7d309c25
-5b4d-4ae7-af68-59ace2817707/summary.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
144
with the premise that “reduction euphoria,” which aims to explain
consciousness by “some variety of materialism, psychophysical identi-
fication, or reduction” gets it “obviously wrong,” and he states upfront
and repeats at the conclusion, “we have at present no conception of what
an explanation of the physical nature of a mental phenomenon would
be” (Nagel, 1974).
Nagel’s essay focuses on the nature of subjective experience, which
could differ widely among different sentient creatures (hence the “bat”
of the title). His point is that “It is like something” to have a conscious
experience; it is not like nothing. It is perhaps Nagel’s footnote on the
phrase that has had the most lasting impact: “Therefore the analogical
form of the English expression "what it is like" is misleading. It does not
mean "what (in our experience) it resembles," but rather "how it is for the
subject himself” (Nagel, 1974).
Nagel does not conclude that physicalism with respect to con-
sciousness is false. “Nothing is proved by the inadequacy of physicalist
hypotheses that assume a faulty objective analysis of mind. It would be
truer to say that physicalism is a position we cannot understand because
we do not at present have any conception of how it might be true”
(Nagel, 1974).
Thirty-eight years later, Nagel published the controversial Mind &
Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost
Certainly False, and he goes further: “The failure of reductionism in the
philosophy of mind has implications that extend beyond the mind-body
problem. Psychophysical reductionism is an essential component of a
broader naturalistic program, which cannot survive without it” (Nagel,
2012). Thus, Nagel rejects wholly physicalist/materialist explanations,
not only for consciousness but also for all reality!
Nagel is no theist. (“It isn’t just that I don’t believe in God and,
naturally, hope that I’m right in my belief. It’s that I hope there is no
God! I don’t want there to be a God; I don’t want the universe to be like
that” [Nagel, 1997].) As a comprehensive worldview, he does not find
theism any more credible than materialism. His interest is “in the ter-
ritory between them.” He asserts that “these two radically opposed
conceptions of ultimate intelligibility cannot exhaust the possibilities.
All explanations come to an end somewhere. Both theism and materi-
alism say that at the ultimate level, there is one form of understanding.
But would an alternative secular conception be possible that acknowl-
edged mind and all that it implies, not as the expression of divine
intention but as a fundamental principle of nature along with physical
law?” (Nagel, 2012).
As a result, Nagel finds himself moving to a universal monism or
panpsychism. “If we imagine an explanation taking the form of an
enlarged version of the natural order, with complex local phenomena
formed by composition from universally available basic elements, it will
depend on some kind of monism or panpsychism, rather than laws of
psychophysical emergence that come into operation only late in the
game” (Nagel, 2012).
Earlier, he had argued that panpsychism would follow from four
premises: 1) All is material; there is no spiritual existence, no disem-
bodied souls. 2) Consciousness is not wholly reducible to physical
properties. 3) Consciousness is real; mental states exist. 4) Strong
emergence is not possible; all higher-order properties of matter can be
derived from the properties of its lower-order constituents (Nagel,
1979).
Yet, I choose to classify Nagel under “Challenge Theories,” not under
Panpsychism or Monism, because he is more passionate to explicate the
profundity of the problem than to promote even his kind of solution.
18.2. McGinn’s ultimate mystery (mysterianism)
Philosopher Colin McGinn argues that the bond between the mind
and the brain is “an ultimate mystery, a mystery that human intelligence
will never unravel” (McGinn, 2000). In his classic paper, “Can We Solve
the Mind-Body Problem?” McGinn opens his case: “We have been trying
for a long time to solve the mind-body problem. It has stubbornly
resisted our best efforts. The mystery persists. I think the time has come
to admit candidly that we cannot resolve the mystery.” He concludes his
case thus: “A deep fact about our own nature as a form of embodied
consciousness is thus necessarily hidden from us” (McGinn, 1989).
For his fondness of the word “mystery” in the context of conscious-
ness, McGinn was awarded the appellation “mysterian”—not a label of
his choosing—and he became an unvolunteered leader of the “New
Mysterians,” an ad hoc, though serious group of mostly philosophers and
some scientists who have come to believe that consciousness may never
be explained completely67 (New mysterianism, 2023). They are distin-
guished from the “old mysterians” who believed that consciousness is
supernatural (from God or the Cosmic Order). The New Mysterians are
not dualists or idealists: just because human intellect can never under-
stand consciousness does not mean there is anything supernatural about
it. The mind-body problem is simply "the perimeter of our conceptual
anatomy making itself felt." McGinn describes his position as “existential
naturalism.”
McGinn stresses that consciousness in our universe is contingent, not
necessary, so it could have been that while the physical laws obtained,
no consciousness ever evolved. “Not every world has consciousness in it,
so our world might have been a world in which there was no con-
sciousness.” This is why, McGinn says, “I’m opposed to the idealist view,
or the panpsychist view,” that “the physical world itself is somehow
inherently spiritual.” He says it is “incontestable that consciousness
arises solely from the material world” (McGinn, 2007a).
What are possible deep mechanisms? “[Some] have to bring God in
to explain how the mind comes into existence,” a view that McGinn finds
unacceptable. “You might hope you can jettison God from the picture so
you have a more scientific version of dualism.”
McGinn reveals a wild speculation that he once entertained, a bizarre
idea that gives insight into how profound the explanatory problem. “I
once played with the idea that there were two universes, which existed
through all eternity,” McGinn muses. “There’s a material universe and
there’s a conscious universe; they were coarsely isolated, but at some
point in universal history there was a kind of causal breakthrough be-
tween the two.” With this mechanism, consciousness occurs in this
“conjoined double universe” because it had existed in the conscious
universe for all eternity. “That’s a very far out theory,” McGinn smiles,
“nobody’s ever maintained that theory … not even me. I brought it
forward to explain what dualism would have to be like in order to even
be coherent.” (McGinn, 2007b).
McGinn is not alone in wondering if humanity will ever truly un-
derstand consciousness. Martin Rees, the UK Astronomer Royal, also
questions the human cognitive capacity to discern consciousness (Rees,
2007). Mathematical physicist and leading string theorist Edward Wit-
ten, who is optimistic that physics can solve nature’s most profound
mysteries of fundamental structure and ultimate origins, is pessimistic
about prospects for a scientific explanation of consciousness. “I think
consciousness will remain a mystery,” Witten said, “I tend to think that
the workings of the conscious brain will be elucidated to a large extent
… But why something that we call consciousness goes with those
workings, I think that will remain mysterious. I have a much easier time
imagining how we understand the Big Bang than I have imagining how
we can understand consciousness …” (Horgan, 2016).
18.3. S. Harris’s mystery of consciousness
Philosopher, author, and neuroscientist Sam Harris, who is not
known for timidity in offering opinions, does not offer his own theory of
consciousness. Instead, he offers a mystery. The problem, he says, “is
that no evidence for consciousness exists in the physical world.” By this
67 Owen Flanagan first applied the term “mysterians” to those who argued that
the problem of consciousness would be impossible to solve, a pessimistic po-
sition he rejected (Flanagan, 1991).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
145
he means that “physical events are simply mute as to whether it is ‘like
something’ to be what they are. The only thing in this universe that
attests to the existence of consciousness is consciousness itself; the only
clue to subjectivity, as such, is subjectivity.” To Harris, it is not an
“explanatory gap; ” it’s an unbridgeable gap (Section: Harris, 2011).
While Harris of course appreciates high correlations between mental
states and brain states, “absolutely nothing about a brain, when sur-
veyed as a physical system,” he says, “suggests that it is a locus of
experience.” Consciousness seems the obvious fact about our world, but,
“were we not already brimming with consciousness ourselves, we would
find no evidence of it in the physical universe—nor would we have any
notion of the many experiential states that it gives rise to.”
“While we know many things about ourselves in anatomical, physi-
ological, and evolutionary terms,” Harris continues, “we do not know
why it is ‘like something’ to be what we are. The fact that the universe is
illuminated where you stand—that your thoughts and moods and sen-
sations have a qualitative character—is a mystery, exceeded only by the
mystery that there should be something rather than nothing in this
universe. How is it that unconscious events can give rise to conscious-
ness? Not only do we have no idea, but it seems impossible to imagine
what sort of idea could fit in the space provided” (Harris, 2011).
Harris targets emergence as a false friend in the pursuit of con-
sciousness. He recognizes that “most scientists are confident that con-
sciousness emerges from unconscious complexity.” Nevertheless, “this
notion of emergence” strikes Harris “as nothing more than a restatement
of a miracle. To say that consciousness emerged at some point in the
evolution of life doesn’t give us an inkling of how it could emerge from
unconscious processes, even in principle.” He stresses, “This notion of
emergence is incomprehensible,” then he doubles down: “The idea that
consciousness is identical to (or emerged from) unconscious physical
events is, I would argue, impossible to properly conceive—which is to
say that we can think we are thinking it, but we are mistaken. We can say
the right words, of course—’consciousness emerges from unconscious
information processing.’ We can also say ‘Some squares are as round as
circles’ and ‘2 plus 2 equals 7.’ But are we really thinking these things all
the way through? I don’t think so.”
Harris asserts that “Consciousness—the sheer fact that this universe
is illuminated by sentience—is precisely what unconsciousness is not.
And I believe that no description of unconscious complexity will fully
account for it … an analysis of purely physical processes will never yield
a picture of consciousness.” Does Harris then hedge? However, he says,
“this is not to say that some other thesis about consciousness must be
true. Consciousness may very well be the lawful product of unconscious
information processing.” But his apparent hedge is a feint. “But I don’t
know what that sentence means,” he declares, “and I don’t think anyone
else does either.”
Continuing, Harris asks, “Couldn’t a mature neuroscience never-
theless offer a proper explanation of human consciousness in terms of its
underlying brain processes?” It’s the common consensus among most
neuroscientists, which Harris unambiguously rejects. “Reductions of this
sort are neither possible nor conceptually coherent,” he says. “Nothing
about a brain, studied at any scale (spatial or temporal), even suggests
that it might harbor consciousness. Nothing about human behavior, or
language, or culture, demonstrates that these products are mediated by
subjectivity. We simply know that they are—a fact that we appreciate in
ourselves directly and in others by analogy.”
While Harris is hardly optimistic about science’s long-future pros-
pects “to dispel the fundamental mystery of our mental life,” and he has
little time for conventional religious doctrines, he does see a role for
introspection. “Many truths about ourselves will be discovered in con-
sciousness directly,” he says, “or not discovered at all” (Harris, 2011).
18.4. Eagleman’s possibilianism
Neuroscientist, technologist, and author David Eagleman labels
himself a “possibilian” in that he calls for “an openness in approaching
the big questions of our existence” (Eagleman, 2010). He embraces
“Possibilianism” as an overarching philosophy, rejecting a false di-
chotomy between either atheism (denying the existence of God) or
theism (wholly believing in God)—and he finds agnosticism passive and
uninteresting (Possibilianism, 2022). Eagleman’s Possibilianism applies,
with similar significance, to consciousness (Eagleman, n.d.).
Eagleman says consciousness “rides on top of a massive amount of
machinery … it’s successive levels of abstraction.” Even a basic move-
ment like drinking a cup of coffee triggers a “lightning storm of neural
activity that underpins that act.” But “I’m not aware of any of that in my
consciousness. All I want is a very high-level abstract representation,
which is, ‘Am I succeeding or am I spilling it on myself?’” (Eagleman,
2011a).
Eagleman draws the analogy between consciousness and the CEO of
a large company. “He or she doesn’t understand much of anything about
the machinery underneath.” The CEO’s job is setting the company’s
long-term vision and the plan to accomplish it. “If everything is running
just fine, the CEO doesn’t even need to know … it’s only when some-
thing surprising happens that the CEO has to sit up and say, ‘OK, what’s
going on?’” It’s exactly the same with consciousness, Eagleman says. “If
everything is going as expected, I don’t have to be very conscious.”
“Why does it [consciousness] feel like something?” Eagleman asks.
“That we don’t know—and the weird situation is that not only don’t we
have a theory, but we don’t even know what such a theory would look
like. Because nothing in our modern mathematics says, well, ‘do a triple
integral and carry the two’ and then here is the taste of feta cheese.” We
can see “this set of Christmas tree lights [flash in the brain] when you’re
conscious of this or that—but it still leaves us feeling quite empty as to
why it feels that way” (Eagleman, 2011a).
Can we ever, in principle, explain inner experience? “I don’t see
how,” Eagleman says, adding quickly, “Now that is either (a) a limitation
of my imagination or (b) … it might be materialism is wrong.”
He explains, “The reason neuroscientists generally subscribe to
materialism” is “because we have a million examples where brain
damage changes the person, changes their conscious state … there’s this
irrevocable relationship between the biology and the conscious state,
but that doesn’t mean materialism has to be true. There are alternative
theories that could be the case.”
Eagleman stresses he is not saying he subscribes to these alternative
theories, but notes, “let me just say, agnostically, they are perfectly
possible.” No doubt, he concludes, “our mind is integrally dependent on
the brain.” But “whether this is all that’s required or whether there’s
something else that our science is too young to understand, that’s the
open question” (Eagleman, 2011b).
18.5. Tallis’s anti-neuromania skepticism
Philosopher and humanist Raymond Tallis, a former geriatric
neurologist and clinical neuroscientist, has a baffling yet coherent and
penetrating perspective on consciousness (my highest compliment)
(Tallis, 2011a). He is anti-reductionist in principle, not just in practice,
asserting, “We have failed to explain how consciousness equates to
neural activity inside the skull because the task is self-contradictory in
that we cannot access qualitative, subjective consciousness by means of
an objective, often quantitative approach.” There is an inevitable failure
to explain consciousness in terms of neural activity because there is
nothing in such activity that can “explain the ‘aboutness’ of mental
entities, the simultaneous unity and multiplicity of the moments of
consciousness, the explicit presence of the past, the initiation of actions
that point to an as yet non-existent future, the construction of self”
(Tallis, 2010).
Nor can we explain “appearings,” Tallis argues, because we are
constrained by “an objective approach that has set aside appearings as
unreal and which seeks reality in mass/energy that neither appears in
itself nor has the means to make other items appear. The brain, seen as a
physical object, no more has a world of things appearing to it than does
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
146
any other physical object” (Tallis, 2010).
Tallis dismantles “the notion that there is close correlation between
neural activity and aspects of consciousness.” The more carefully you
look at it, he says, “the less impressive it is, despite all the advances in
recent neuroscience.” And correlation, anyway, does not amount to
causation or identity. “When you see neural activity in the brain, is that
really identical with conscious experience? Let me take a simple
example. I’m looking at a yellow object. That will correspond to neural
activity in my occipital cortex, at the back of the brain. That neural
activity is quite unlike the phenomenal appearance of a yellow object.
Yet, according to those who believe in ‘neurophilosophy,’ the actual
phenomenal appearance of the yellow object—my experience of yel-
lowness—is identical with neural activity in the back of the brain. Now,
if those two things really were identical, well, at least you might expect
them to look a little bit like each other, and of course, they don’t. So, to
engender conscious experience, there must be something more than
neural activity.” The brain is no doubt necessary, according to Tallis, but
it is certainly not sufficient (Tallis, 2011a).
Tallis runs down the list of potential explanations. He dismisses
“naturalistic explanations”—which ultimately means materialistic
explanations—[because they] leave consciousness, self-consciousness,
the self, free will, the community of minds and the most human features
of the human world unexplained” (Tallis, 2009).
What then is Tallis’s solution to the mind-body problem? God?
Dualism? Panpsychism?
As for supernatural explanations, they “simply parcel up our un-
certainties into the notion of an entity—God—that is not only unex-
plained but usually contradictory.” (Tallis, 2009). Tallis is an
unrepentant atheist and does not subscribe to any known theory of
consciousness. He thinks Cartesian dualism is a lost cause and panpsy-
chism fails to explain how universal mind-dust gathers itself up into a
conscious subject (Tallis, 2011b).
“The foundations of phenomenal consciousness and knowledge
elude us,” Tallis states. “So, some kind of skepticism, justifying an in-
quiry that enables us to question the all-too-obvious, the glass wall of
our everyday thinking about everyday life, seems entirely in order.”
(Tallis, 2009). “We atheists have good reason to be ontological agnostics
and to believe that anything is possible” (Tallis, 2011b).
18.6. Nagasawa’s mind-body problem in an infinitely decomposable
universe
Philosopher Yujin Nagasawa poses the disruptive idea of what would
happen to the mind-body problem if there were no such thing as the
deepest level of reality, because the universe is infinitely decomposable?
He argues that such a possibility would be devastating to theories of
consciousness because it would undermine all traditional responses to
the mind-body problem, such as physicalism, dualism, idealism and
neutral monism. Attempts to rescue physicalism from such an argument
do not succeed, he argues, because “Physicalism (and any alternative to
it) turns out to be an unfalsifiable, unverifiable, and unstable meta-
physical view” (Nagasawa, 2012b).
However, “Their failures might motivate a unique form of monism
that is radically different from physicalism as commonly formulated.” It
leads to a “priority monism” because “It motivates us to seek funda-
mentality on the top, rather than on the bottom, level of reality.” The
main difference between priority monism and traditional micro-funda-
mentalism, Nagasawa says, is that “Priority monism regards the whole
universe, rather than its ultimate components, as most fundamental.
Locating the fundamental level at the top enables priority monism to
secure a firm [if unusual] metaphysical ground”—because then, the
totality of everything, including all that we call physical entities and
mental entities, is the single fundamental entity, of which all of its
components are derivative.
Nagasawa concedes that while what he has is truly a monism, with
exactly one fundamental entity, it is neither monism nor dualism in the
context of the mind-body problem. Rather, he suggests, it “has an af-
finity with monism in Eastern traditions, which regard the totality as an
organic whole in which numerous entities are entangled” (Nagasawa,
2012a).
18.7. Musser’s “is it really so hard?”
Science journalist George Musser explores the relationship between
consciousness and physics with two explanatory arrows pointing in
opposite directions. In addition to the normal using-science-to-explain-
consciousness framework, he focuses on “why physicists are studying
human consciousness and AI to unravel the mysteries of the universe.”
Must physics, to find its holy-grail “theory of everything,” account for
consciousness? Reciprocally, could such investigations provide new in-
sights into physics? (Musser, 2023a,b).
Musser centers his inquiry at the intersection of fundamental physics,
neuroscience, and rapidly developing AI, and after examining diverse
approaches, such as neural networks and quantum computing, predic-
tive coding and integrated information theory, he concludes with
cautious optimism that we humans do have a shot at comprehending our
consciousness. “There is as yet no sign that science has hit a wall,”
Musser says. “Our minds evolved to understand the world, which re-
quires that the world be understandable. And we are of this world”
(Musser, 2023a,b, p. 251).
Musser wants to reject the “mysterian” position of Colin McGinn,
Steven Pinker, Noam Chomsky, and others, who think we might never
grasp how consciousness works, even though they still have conscious-
ness as a product of the natural, physical world, “rather than an exotic
add-on” (like panpsychism) (Musser, 2023a,b, p. 240). Although he
comes to no firm conclusion, Musser gives pride of place to explanations
of consciousness that are “perspectival” or “relational.” He approvingly
quotes Carlo Rovelli (11.16) that the physical world is “a web of re-
lations … things have no properties in isolation, but acquire them only at
their point of contact with other things” (Musser, 2023a,b, p. 148).
Musser then begins “to think about how qualia might be relational”
(Musser, 2023a,b, p. 243).
Musser and colleagues wonder whether the exponentially-growing
power of AI could, at some future point, devise or discover theories that
a human mind could not, from foundations of quantum mechanics to the
essence of consciousness. Perhaps, Musser muses, “the machines will
help us the most when they are their most inscrutable” (Musser, 2023a,
b, p. 250). (Personally, I would find it a very large surprise if AI, however
successful at predicting protein structures and checking mega-math
proofs, could provide novel insight to the hard problem. AI might enjoy
proving me wrong.)
18.8. Davies’s consciousness in the cosmos
Physicist and polymath Paul Davies asserts the heterodox view
among scientists that consciousness is something very significant in the
evolution of the universe. “Although we see consciousness only in
response to some set of physical systems, nevertheless it seems to me to
play an absolute and fundamental role. Because at one level, all of sci-
ence, our whole understanding of the universe, comes through our own
consciousness. It’s actually the starting point of all inquiry” (Davies,
2006b).
But what of the minuscule place of consciousness amidst the unfa-
thomably vast universe? Davies muses: “Is consciousness on the surface
of our planet just a little embellishment on the great scheme of things or
does it have fundamental role? I should also say that whether it’s
fundamental or not, we surely have to explain it. It has got to fit into our
scientific picture of the world, but I don’t think we’ve got a clue as to
how to go about it because none of the concepts from fundamental
physics, like mass and momentum and charge, seem relevant at all.”
With respect to whether consciousness really matters to quantum
physics, Davies says that physicists are sharply split and that he himself
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
147
has oscillated. “I used to think that consciousness was just getting in the
way of understanding. But because I’m convinced that consciousness is a
fundamental part of the universe, I’d like to find a place for it in physics.
And the one place that it has been ‘on again and off again’ is within the
realm of quantum physics. So, consciousness could enter quantum
physics at the point of observation where the rules of the quantum game
change as a result of that observation or measurement” (Davies, 2006b).
Davies is critical of the many-world interpretation (MWI) of the
Schr¨odinger equation that governs the wave function of quantum me-
chanical systems. While MWI adherents argue they are literalists, Davies
counters that “it’s a way of trying to get rid of consciousness from
playing a fundamental role in quantum physics.” He calls MWI a “missed
opportunity,” because “if we’re going to actually incorporate con-
sciousness into our description of physics it’s at the quantum level that
we should attempt to do so.”
Can one then go from consciousness at the quantum level to con-
sciousness at the universe level, not just as metaphor but to actually
explain reality? Davies focuses on the challenge of giving a cosmic sig-
nificance to consciousness because, as far as we know, there are so
vanishingly few conscious beings in the vast universe (Davies, 2006b,
2006c).
Davies looks to the far future of the universe. “It seems entirely
possible that human beings or alien beings or any sort of conscious be-
ings are going to spread out across the universe. We think a universe of
13.8 billion years is old; in fact, it’s exceedingly young. There’s no
reason why it can’t go on for trillions and trillions of years. There’s
absolutely plenty of time for it to become full of minds, full of observers.
And we can imagine a time in the far, far future when mind and the
universe in effect merge: they become one. And so the act of observation
which at the moment is limited to maybe a little corner of the universe
could saturate the whole universe. The whole universe could become
self-known.”
But could what might happen in the future affect what has happened
in the past? Davies explains: “Part of the weirdness of quantum physics is
that observations which are made now can affect the nature of reality in
the past.”
This is not “backward causation,” he stresses, but a selection among
myriad alternate possible histories, a developmental history of the uni-
verse that makes sense only in the quantum realm. This is why Davies
can say that “observations made in the very far future can affect the
nature of reality today and even back at the Big Bang.”
Davies concludes with the grand vision: “if you buy this whole
quantum physics package and you have this universe saturated by mind,
saturated by observers, then indeed the whole character of the universe,
including the original emergence of its laws and the nature of its states,
become inextricably intertwined with its mentality, with its mindful-
ness” (Davies, 2006b).
19. Closer to truth views
Following are brief comments on consciousness from participants on
Closer To Truth (arranged alphabetically). Perspectives are diverse.
Quotes are from the Closer To Truth website – www.closertotruth.com.
Tim Bayne: “We’re not in a position to advance theories of any detail
with any degree of certainty. The science of consciousness is so imma-
ture and there are so many fundamental disputes. I think what we should
be looking for are constraints on theories, and once we’ve got those, then
we’re going to be in a better position to discern the underlying theories
… And there’s a fundamental sense in which we don’t know what we’re
talking about. I think we need to be honest. But we can still make
progress” (Bayne, 2007).
Susan Blackmore: “What we need to do and have totally failed to do
so far, is have some kind of true, nondual understanding of the world.
What feels like an outside world of physical things, and what feels like an
inside world of my experience—we must somehow bring these together.
Physicists are trying at one level, psychologists at another, philosophers
at still another … Nobody knows what consciousness is” (Blackmore,
2007).
Colin Blakemore: “The problem of brain and mind is that it’s chalk
and cheese. I know what a brain is. It’s a physical thing; I know what it
looks like, what it contains. I can see brain sections under the micro-
scope. Then this other word, ‘mind’—and we all know what that means
too, in a way. But you can’t put ‘mind’ under a microscope. We don’t
know what constitutes it. Mind is a useful word in dialogue but it doesn’t
map onto something you can study easily experimentally. So, neuro-
scientists have tended to simply put the concept to one side. It’s not the
mind we’re working on; it’s the brain. How much of an animal’s
behavior can be explained just by studying its brains? You can go a long
way, a very long way” (Blakemore, 2012b).
Stephen Braude: “It’s not just that I’m an anti-physicalist, I’m an
anti-mechanist. I don’t think we can give lower-level explanations, ex-
planations by analysis, in terms of psychological regularities or capac-
ities. This takes us to new ways of understanding human behavior: not as
if it’s emitted by a kind of behavior mechanism, but to see and under-
stand human action as one of an indefinitely large number of possibil-
ities in a much grander action space” (Braude, 2007b).
Hubert Dreyfus: “Nobody has any idea [about consciousness], and
they should just keep quiet until they do, because I think it is the hardest
question: How in the world could ‘matter,’ which is this third-person
material stuff, ever produce consciousness? And AI and computers are
not helping us understand it one bit” (Dreyfus, 2009).
Susan Greenfield: “I find unhelpful this notion that our brains are like
satellite dishes, and out there floating in the ether is consciousness,
which our brains pick up” (Greenfield, 2012).
Jaron Lanier: “The real drama of the question of consciousness—on
which I have absolutely no insight—is the possibility of an afterlife.”
Post-mortem survival, Lanier says, is “the name of the game for a lot of
people who concern themselves with consciousness … I think the sci-
entific community ought not to tread on that territory unless it has
something constructive to say.” It’s “simply dumb,” he says, for scien-
tists to tell people, “Don’t believe in that.” “Don’t have any hope.”
“Don’t have any faith.” It’s not something we have evidence about,
Lanier posits, then cautions, “Make your faith disciplined so you don’t
get manipulated by people trying to build power bases or trying to sell
silly superstitions.” Lanier says that “hard attack on soft faith will
backfire and is destructive.” Moreover, “ultimately it isn’t honest,
because many of us do feel this consciousness thing inside, and many of
us wonder what it’s all about on some larger level. We just don’t have
the tools to do anything but wonder” (Lanier, 2007a, 2007b).
Massimo Pigliucci: “The only examples we have of consciousness are
biological. That doesn’t mean that, in principle, it is not possible to build
artificial consciousness, but we have no idea how to do it. And we don’t
know whether, in fact, it is even possible. This truly is an open question
where I am entirely agnostic. But the fact of the matter is, in science,
when you study something, you start with what you have, not with what
you might know in the future. And the thing that we know about con-
sciousness is that it is an evolved biological phenomenon based on
particular substrates” (Pigliucci, 2023a,b.).
Alex Rosenberg: “I think that the available scientific evidence which
drives us to atheism should also drive us to a denial of free will, to a
denial of the existence of absolute fundamental ethical theories, to a
physical materialism about the nature of consciousness, and to a denial
that the history or trajectory of our species’ existence on the planet has
any particular goal, or purpose, or endpoint, or meaning” (Rosenberg,
2022.).
Eric Schwitzgebel: “I don’t rule out the possibility that we’re not in
fact physically embodied in the way that we think we are. One possi-
bility on my map, although not generally accepted in contemporary
philosophy, is idealism. On an idealist view, minds and bodies are just
kind of constructions of our minds. And so it would be misleading in a
certain way to say that minds were physically embodied. It would be
more like bodies are ‘enminded’” (Schwitzgebel, 2014).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
148
Gino Yu: “The Western way of thinking, the Western framing of the
world, is to try to understand who or what I am by looking outward,
rather than by looking inward, observing what is happening …. Trying
to understand the realm of the mind intellectually is like trying to
scratch an itch you cannot reach” (Yu, Gino. 2013).
Samir Zaki: “Not a single sentence written about consciousness is
worth reading. There’s a lot about how it’s being made a subject worthy
of scientific study—I don’t think it will produce anything too worth-
while, actually … Philosophical problems become philosophical prob-
lems by virtue of the fact that there are no solutions to them. What new
theories have been produced by consciousness? They have been negli-
gible” (Zeki, 2019).
In addition, “Must the Universe Contain Consciousness?”—with Paul
Davies, Leonard Susskind, J. Richard Gott, Saul Perlmutter, Alan Guth,
Leonard Mlodinow, Christof Koch, Brian Josephson, Stuart Hameroff,
Michael Shermer, and Deepak Chopra (Must the Universe Contain, n.d.).
Separately, physics-savvy filmmaker Curt Jaimungal offers a
“layering” approach to consciousness, in which successive levels
(“layers”) of multiple theories reveal greater complexities and depth,
much as he does in expounding string theory on his “Theory of Every-
thing” podcast (Jaimungal, 2014a, 2014b). While more an epistemo-
logical framework than an ontological theory, “layering” could facilitate
novel ways to think about consciousness.
Finallly, the elemental enigma of consciousness—the implicit failure
of any of the myriad theories to suffice—sugggests the inconvenient idea
that perhaps the whole consciousness enterprise is fundamentally
flawed. For example, post-realist philosopher Hilary Lawson has reality
as an "unspecified other"—which he calls "Opennesss"—in principle
inaccessible and unknowable—and what we do is "Close" the Openness
of the forever-hidden "real world" by taking parts and pieces into "our
world" of things and thoughts and properties. We "Close" via language,
observation and reason, which is required to engage and intervene, but
in doing so we also limit or cut off untold realms of reality (Lawson,
2001). One could suppose this is what we do with consciousness.
20. Chalmers’s meta-problem of consciousness
We’ve got one more topic. It’s not on the Landscape. It’s about the
Landscape. It’s the meta-problem of consciousness. David Chalmers, its
originator, explains: “The meta-problem of consciousness is the problem
of explaining why we think that there is a problem of consciousness.”
(Chalmers, 2018). While the meta-problem is not a theory or explana-
tion of consciousness, it gives insight into the ways of thinking of leading
theorists and it probes the psychosocial structure of the field.
Chalmers continues: “The meta-problem is a problem about a prob-
lem. The initial problem is the hard problem of consciousness: why and
how do physical processes in the brain give rise to conscious experience?
The meta-problem is the problem of explaining why we think con-
sciousness poses a hard problem, or in other terms, the problem of
explaining why we think consciousness is hard to explain.” Equivalently,
it is the problem of explaining why people have problem intuitions …
including metaphysical intuitions (“consciousness is non-physical”),
explanatory intuitions (“physical processes can’t fully explain con-
sciousness”), knowledge intuitions (“someone who knows all about the
brain but has never seen colors doesn’t know what it’s like to see red”),
and modal intuitions (“we can imagine all these physical processes
without consciousness”). There are also intuitions about the value of
consciousness, the distribution of consciousness, and more (Chalmers,
2018).
In a special issue of the Journal of Consciousness Studies dedicated to
the meta-problem of consciousness, 39 colleagues respond to Chalmers.
Following are several whose own theories are presented on the Land-
scape (Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2019).
Andy Clark, Karl Friston, Sam Wilkinson: “The meta-problem of
consciousness is the problem of explaining the behaviours and verbal
reports that we associate with the so-called ‘hard problem of
consciousness’. These may include reports of puzzlement, of the
attractiveness of dualism, of explanatory gaps, and the like. We present
and defend a solution to the meta-problem. Our solution takes as its
starting point the emerging picture of the brain as a hierarchical infer-
ence engine. We show why such a device, operating under familiar forms
of adaptive pressure, may come to represent some of its mid-level in-
ferences as especially certain. These mid-level states confidently re-code
raw sensory stimulation in ways that (they are able to realize) fall short
of fully determining how properties and states of affairs are arranged in
the distal world. This drives a wedge between experience and the world.
Advanced agents then represent these mid-level inferences as irreduc-
ibly special, becoming increasingly puzzled as a result” (Clark et al.,
2019).
Daniel Dennett: “David Chalmers underestimates the possibility that
actually answering the ‘hard question’ will make both the hard problem
and the meta-problem of consciousness evaporate” (Dennett, 2019).
Keith Frankish: “The meta-problem of consciousness prompts the
meta-question: is it the only problem consciousness poses? If we could
explain all our phenomenal intuitions in topic-neutral terms, would
anything remain to be explained? Realists say yes, illusionists no. In this
paper I defend the illusionist answer. While it may seem obvious that
there is something further to be explained—consciousness itself—this
seemingly innocuous claim immediately raises a further problem—the
hard meta-problem. What could justify our continued confidence in the
existence of consciousness once all our intuitions about it have been
explained away? The answer would involve heavy-duty metaphysical
theorizing, probably including a commitment either to substance
dualism or to the existence of a mysterious intrinsic subjectivity. A far
less extravagant option is to endorse the illusionist response and
conclude that the meta-problem is not a meta-problem at all but the
problem of consciousness” (Frankish, 2019).
Nicholas Humphrey (who offers “A Soft Landing for Consciousness”):
“Problem reports result from several misunderstandings about the na-
ture and functions of phenomenal consciousness. I discuss some philo-
sophical and scientific correctives that, taken together, can make the
hard problem seem less hard” (Humphrey, 2019).
David Papineau: “I am glad that David Chalmers has now come
round to the view that explaining the ‘problem intuitions’ about con-
sciousness is the key to a satisfactory philosophical account of the topic.
I find it surprising, however, given his previous writings, that Chalmers
does not simply attribute these intuitions to the conceptual gap between
physical and phenomenal facts. Still, it is good that he doesn’t, given
that this was always a highly implausible account of the problem in-
tuitions. Unfortunately, later in his paper Chalmers slides back into his
misguided previous emphasis on the conceptual gap, in his objections to
orthodox a posteriori physicalism. Because of this he fails to appreciate
how this orthodox physicalism offers a natural solution to the challenges
posed by consciousness” (Papineau, 2019).
Galen Strawson: “Many hold that (1) consciousness poses a uniquely
hard problem. Why is this so? Chalmers considers 12 main answers in
‘The Meta-Problem of Consciousness’ … This paper focuses on number
11, and is principally addressed to those who endorse (1) because they
think that (2) consciousness can’t possibly be physical. It argues that to
hold (2) is to make the mistake of underestimating the physical, and that
almost all who make this mistake do so because they think they know
more about the physical than they do. When we see things right, we see
that there is nothing in physics nor in our everyday experience of the
physical that gives us any good reason to hold (2). This leaves us free to
embrace the overwhelmingly strong reasons for accepting that (3)
consciousness is wholly physical. The correct general response is the
same as the response to wave–particle duality: acceptance without
expectation of understanding” (Strawson, 2019a).
Joseph Levine: “The key to understanding both consciousness itself
and addressing the meta-problem is to understand what acquaintance is
and what its objects are …. First, treat conscious experience as the
holding of a basic, intentional relation of acquaintance between the
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
149
conscious subject and a virtual world of objects and properties. In a
sense I would endorse the almost universally deplored ‘Cartesian
theatre’ model of experience. What it is to have conscious experience, on
this view, is just to stand in a primitive or basic acquaintance relation to
the objects of experience …. We still need a way of making the cognitive
immediacy of experience explicable in the nature of the relation be-
tween the cognitive states about acquaintance and the phenomenon of
acquaintance itself. One possible line of investigation is to employ the
notion of cognitive phenomenology (9.6.3, 9.6.4, 9.6.5). After all, it is
when one is occurrently entertaining thoughts about one’s experience
that one gains knowledge of this acquaintance relation … Unfortunately
…, it is unclear how our acquaintance with the contents of experience
can serve as data for our theory of conscious experience” (Levine, 2019).
Chalmers responds to his respondents in-depth (Chalmers, 2020a,
2020b, 2020c). Here is how he organizes his responses. “The commen-
taries divide fairly neatly into about three groups. About half of them
discuss potential solutions to the meta-problem. About a quarter of them
discuss the question of whether intuitions about consciousness are uni-
versal, widespread, or culturally local. And about a quarter discuss
illusionism about consciousness and especially debunking arguments
that move from a solution to the meta-problem to illusionism … As a
result, I have divided my reply into three parts, each of which can stand
alone. This first part is ‘How Can We Solve the Meta-Problem of Con-
sciousness?’ The other two parts are ‘Is the Hard Problem of Con-
sciousness Universal?’ and ‘Debunking Arguments for Illusionism about
Consciousness’” (Chalmers, 2020a).
“How can we solve the meta-problem? As a reminder, the meta-
problem is the problem of explaining our problem intuitions about
consciousness, including the intuition that consciousness poses a hard
problem and related explanatory and metaphysical intuitions, among
others. One constraint is to explain the intuitions in topic-neutral terms
(for example, physical, computational, structural, or evolutionary
terms) that do not make explicit appeal to consciousness in the expla-
nation … I canvassed about 15 potential solutions to the meta-problem. I
expressed sympathy with seven of them as elements of a solution:
introspective models, phenomenal concepts, independent roles, intro-
spective opacity, immediate knowledge, primitive quality attribution,
and primitive relation attribution …” (Chalmers, 2020a).
How does Chalmers view developments in consciousness studies
since he highlighted, or ignited, the hard problem? “One thing that’s
really nice to see now is a lot of people are taking the problem a lot more
seriously. And there has been a panoply of ideas, left and right, philos-
ophers and scientists trying to address the problem of consciousness in a
way that doesn’t reduce consciousness to something else or try to deflate
it, whereas in the past, all the predominant approaches were reduc-
tionist. Now, that’s not the case” (Chalmers, 2016b).
As for Chalmer’s own thinking, he says, “I’ve gradually evolved to-
ward trying to focus on constructive theories of consciousness. For a
while, it was a matter of fighting battles with materialists; I still enjoy
that, but I think we’re at the point where it’s more worthwhile to focus
on getting the details of constructive theory right. So, I’ve thought a lot
about panpsychism, the idea that consciousness is fundamental in the
universe—and how you can overcome the problems for that kind of
view. I’ve thought about the idea that consciousness might play a role in
quantum mechanics, and how that might help provide a role for con-
sciousness in the universe. In general, although my hair has gotten
shorter, my tolerance for wild ideas has gotten higher: I’m prepared to
entertain all kinds of crazy ideas when it comes to a theory of con-
sciousness. I think one thing we’ve learned is that we’re just not going to
have a good theory of consciousness without a wild idea or two in there.
If you try to make it all common sense, it’s just not going to work. But I
think we’ve also learned we can be rigorous at the same time (Chalmers,
2016b).
21. Implications
That’s it. The explanations and theories on the Landscape of Con-
sciousness—currently. They will change.
As promised, I shall not adjudicate among them, rank them in some
order, critique this or that. Nor, should I try, would I have much confi-
dence in my own, idiosyncratic views.
Scanning through all of them, this blizzard of explanations and
theories, I respect but resist Colin McGinn’s old admonition: “The
mystery persists. I think the time has come to admit candidly that we
cannot resolve the mystery” (McGinn, 1989).
We go on.
That’s what it means to be human.
I’m asked by viewers of Closer To Truth why I don’t take more stands
and give more answers to the big questions we pursue. I respond that if I
knew, I’d tell—I’m keeping no secrets. Rather, I’ve learned to luxuriate
in the questions, with an agnosticism that is proactive and passionate.
Now the fun part. I turn to implications of the explanations or the-
ories of consciousness with respect to four big questions: (i) ultimate
meaning/purpose/value (if any); (ii) AI consciousness; (iii) virtual
immortality; and (iv) survival beyond death.
What can be said? Most must be speculative, of course, but some
general principles might hold.68
22. Meaning/purpose/value
Under Materialism Theories (9) (philosophical, neurobiological,
electromagnetic fields, computational and informational, homeostatic
and affective, embodied and enactive, relational, representational, lan-
guage, phylogenetic evolution), I’d be hard-pressed to rationalize any
ultimate meaning or purpose, and probably no ultimate value, but
recognize the humanistic meaning, purpose and value that we create for
ourselves. None can explain this better than physicist Steven Weinberg.
Near the end of his early book on cosmology, he wrote the indelible line,
“The more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems
pointless” (Weinberg, 1977).
Some 30 years later, I asked Weinberg to reflect on his words. “Oh, I
don’t have any second thoughts. I do think that as we’ve learned more
and more about the universe, we’ve seen that there is no point in nature.
There is nothing in the laws of nature that refer to human beings. There’s
nothing that gives us guidance. We do not discover that we are part of a
cosmic drama in which we play a central role” (Weinberg, 2006).
However, Weinberg reflected further: “But I did have a following
paragraph. I said that [even] if we don’t find a point in nature, we can at
least make a point for ourselves. We can love each other and find beauty
in things. And one of the things that gives point to some of our lives is the
process of discovering nature, discovering the laws of nature. But
whatever point there is, it is one that we have to give to ourselves.” (I’ve
said on Closer To Truth that if I were God, Steven Weinberg would be my
prophet.)
By contrast, almost all Dualism (15) and Idealism (16) theories offer
some kind of ultimate meaning/purpose/value (countless variations are
imagined and on offer). Non-Reductive Physicalism (10), Panpsychism
(13), many Monisms (14), and some Quantum Theories (11) sit in the
middle, with possible ultimate meaning/purpose/value. John Leslie’s
theory of why there is a universe, not a blank, has “Value” as its heart
(Leslie, 2013). Non-Reductive Physicalism is taken up by some Christian
philosophers who see God’s purpose working toward a resurrection of
the dead, not toward a post-mortem heaven or hell (with no immediate
state between moment of death and moment of resurrection).
While Anomalous and Altered States theories distribute their support
68 Some sections are derived or adapted from my earlier article: Kuhn, Robert
Lawrence. (2016a). Virtual Immortality. Skeptic Magazine, Volume 21, Number
2, 2016.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
150
among Dualism, Quantum, and Monism theories, they all envision an
expanded reality with potential for new kinds or levels of meaning, and
almost all give credence to some kind of life or state of consciousness
after death.
Integrated Information Theory may be the subtlest to interpret in
that while its measurement and analysis of consciousness convey no
ultimate meaning/purpose/value, its speculative, innumerable nth
dimensional structures, each a conscious percept, is sufficiently novel to
suspend judgment.
23. Artificial intelligence (AI) consciousness
Whether artificial intelligence (AI) can be or become conscious,
while long a question, has burst into public discourse—due to the sud-
den impact of large language models such as ChatGPT, Gemini, and
others. AI consciousness has become a serious matter of global concern.
The question has vast social, moral and perhaps human-species-wide
consequences.
A major multidisciplinary report, bringing together AI experts, phi-
losophers, neuroscientists and psychologists, argues for and exemplifies
a rigorous and empirically grounded approach to AI consciousness. The
report surveys prominent scientific theories of consciousness, all of
which are on this Landscape, and derives “indicator properties” of
consciousness, which are used to assess AI systems. The conclusion is
that no current AI system is conscious, but that there are no obvious
barriers to building AI systems that could be conscious (Butlin, 2023).
It must be stressed that the report’s working hypothesis is computa-
tional functionalism, the thesis that performing computations of the right
kind is necessary and sufficient for consciousness. The report adopts this
hypothesis for pragmatic reasons: unlike rival views, it entails that
consciousness in AI is possible in principle and that studying the
workings of AI systems can assess whether they are likely to be
conscious. Though indeed a mainstream position in philosophy of mind,
computational functionalism is challenged by diverse rivals on the
Landscape.
To philosopher John Searle, computer programs can never have a
mind or be conscious in the human sense, even if they give rise to
equivalent behaviors and interactions with the external world. In
Searle’s famous “Chinese Room” argument, a person inside a closed
space can use a rule book to match Chinese characters with English
words and thus appear to understand Chinese, when, in fact, she does
not. (There is dispute about the validity of Searle’s Chinese Room
argument [Cole, 2023].)
Nonetheless, Searle argues that just because brain processes cause
consciousness and intentionality (aboutness) does not imply that only
brains can be conscious. The brain is a biological machine, and we might
build an artificial machine that was conscious. Because we do not know
how the brain generates consciousness, Searle says, is the reason we are
not yet in a position to know how to do it artificially (Searle, 2007a,
2007b).
Rather, what Searle rejects is that a simulation of brain states,
however detailed the information and precise the representation, can
achieve the subjective qualities of inner awareness. What is required for
consciousness, he says, is the same set or system of biological processes
that the brain uses (Searle, 2002; Proust, 2003).
Will it ever be possible, with hyper-advanced technology, for non-
biological intelligences to be conscious in the same sense that we are
conscious? Can computers have ‘inner experience’?69
“It’s like the question, ‘Can a machine artificially pump blood as the
heart does?” Searle responds. “Sure it can—we have artificial hearts. So,
if we can know exactly how the brain causes consciousness, down to its
finest details, I don’t see any obstacle, in principle, to building a
conscious machine. That is, if you knew what was causally sufficient to
produce consciousness in human beings and if you could have that
[mechanism] in another system, then you would produce consciousness
in that other system. Note that you don’t need neurons to have con-
sciousness. It’s like saying you don’t need feathers to fly. But to build a
flying machine, you do need sufficient causal power to overcome the
force of gravity” (Searle, 2007b.).
Searle cautions: “The one mistake we must avoid is supposing that if
you simulate it, you duplicate it. A deep mistake embedded in our
popular culture is that simulation is equivalent to duplication. But of
course it isn’t. A perfect simulation of the brain—say, on a computer-
—would be no more conscious than a perfect simulation of a rainstorm
would make us all wet.”
Robotics professor/entrepreneur Rodney Brooks agrees that con-
sciousness can be created in non-biological media, but disagrees on the
nature of consciousness itself. “There’s no reason we couldn’t have a
conscious machine made from silicon,” he said. Brooks’s position de-
rives from his view that the universe is mechanistic and that con-
sciousness, which seems special, is an illusion. We “fool ourselves,” he
says, into “thinking our internal feelings are so unique.” (Brooks, 2011).
AI expert Joscha Bach is bullish on AI consciousness, in part, because
his theory (9.2.10) treats “consciousness as a memory instead of an
actual sense of the present”—which he says “resolves much of the dif-
ficulty for specifying an AI implementation of consciousness: it is
necessary and sufficient to realize a system that remembers having
experienced something, and being able to report on that memory”
(Bach, 2019).
Can we ever really assess consciousness? “I don’t know if you’re
conscious. You don’t know if I’m conscious,” says neuroscientist Michael
Graziano. “But we have a kind of gut certainty about it. This is because
an assumption of consciousness is an attribution, a social attribution.
And when a robot acts like it’s conscious and can talk about its own
awareness, and when we interact with it, we will inevitably have that
social perception, that gut feeling, that the robot is conscious …. But can
you really ever know if there’s ‘anybody home’ internally, if there is any
inner experience?” he continues. “All we do is compute a construct of
awareness” (Graziano, 2014).
Inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil believes that “we will get to a
point where computers will evidence the rich array of emotionally subtle
behaviors that we see in human beings; they will be very intelligent, and
they will claim to be conscious. They will act in ways that are conscious;
they will talk about their own consciousness and argue about it just the
way you and I do. And so the philosophical debate will be whether or not
they really are conscious—and they will be participating in the debate”
(Kurzweil, 2007).
Kurzweil argues that assessing the consciousness of other (possible]
minds is not a scientific question. “We can talk scientifically about the
neurological correlates of consciousness, but fundamentally, con-
sciousness is this subjective experience that only I can experience. I
should talk about it only in first-person terms—although I’ve been suf-
ficiently socialized to accept other people’s consciousness. There’s really
no way to measure the conscious experiences of another entity … But I
would accept that these non-biological intelligences are conscious. And
that’ll be convenient, because if I don’t, they’ll get mad at me.”
Physiological psychologist Warren Brown stresses “embodied
cognition, embodied consciousness,” in that “biology is the richest
substrate for embodying consciousness.” But he doesn’t rule out that
consciousness “might be embodied in something non-biological.” On the
other hand, Brown speculates, “consciousness may be a particular kind
of organization of the world that just cannot be replicated in a non-
biological system” (Brown, 2014).
“I am a functionalist when it comes to consciousness,” says neuro-
scientist Christof Koch. "As long as we can reproduce the same kind of
relevant relationships among all the relevant neurons in the brain, I
think we will have recreated consciousness. The difficult part is, what do
we mean by ‘relevant relationships?’ Does it mean we have to reproduce
69 All quotes from Closer To Truth—www.closertotuth.com—unless otherwise
noted.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
151
the individual motions of all the molecules? Unlikely. It’s more likely
that we have to recreate all the relevant relationships of the brain’s
synapses and the brain’s wiring (the ‘connectome’) in a different me-
dium, like a computer. If we can do all of this reconstruction at the right
level, this entity, this software construct, would be conscious” (Koch,
2012c).
Koch stresses that “experience” requires new, perhaps radical, sci-
entific thinking. “You need to expand the traditional laws of physics. In
physics there is space, time, energy, mass. Those by themselves are
sufficient to explain the physics of the brain. The brain is subject to the
same laws of physics as any other object in the universe. But in addition,
there is something else. There is experience. The experience of pain. The
experience of falling in love. And to account for experience, you need to
enhance the laws of physics.”
In the context of Integrated Information Theory, would Koch be
comfortable with nonbiological consciousness? “Why should I not be?
Consciousness doesn’t require any magical ingredient.”
Over the years, Koch has refined his views. Against the grain, he says,
“integrated information theory radically disagrees with this function-
alist view. It argues from first principles that digital computers can (in
principle) do everything that humans can do, eventually even faster and
better. But they can never be what humans are. Intelligence is
computable, but consciousness is not. This is not because the brain
possesses any supernatural properties. The critical difference between
brains and digital computers is at the hardware level, where the rubber
meets the road—that is, where action potentials are relayed to tens of
thousands of recipient neurons versus packets of electrons shuttled back
and forth among a handful of transistors.” Koch primary point is that
“the integrated information of digital computers is negligible. And that
makes all the difference. It means that these machines will never be
sentient, no matter how intelligent they become. Furthermore, that they
will never possess what we have: the ability to deliberate over an up-
coming choice and freely decide” (Koch, 2024, p. 20).
Theist philosopher Richard Swinburne says, “I don’t see that it is in
the least implausible that a ’radically separate, non-physical substance’
could come into existence as a result of a non-biological process. There
might be some law of nature stating that all sufficiently complicated
computer-like systems become conscious. But the problem is that the
law could not state which conscious being they would become, out of the
innumerable possible individual conscious beings they might become.
And that, in my view, also applies to organisms produced by normal
processes—there may be a law determining that a person with a certain
character emerges as a result of fertilization of an egg, but the law could
not determine which person that was; for the simple reason that laws
deal with the causation of states of affairs of certain kinds by other states
of affairs of certain kinds; and given that a duplicate of me isn’t neces-
sarily me, no law of nature could determine that I would have been born
from my actual parents” (Swinburne, 2016).
Now, for each of the categories of explanations of consciousness, a
conjecture: In which could AI become conscious?
Materialism Theories (9): Sure. For Materialism Theories (with all its
subcategories) to be consistent, AI consciousness must be in principle
absolutely sure. There is no possibility that, given materialism, AI con-
sciousness would be forbidden. If one argues that consciousness must be
embodied, fine, then materialism will build a body. Remember, we are
speaking in ultimate principle, not in current practice, and there are no
time limits. (Dehaene, Lau and Kouider assert that to build machines
that are conscious, novel machine architectures must be based on in-
formation-processing computations similar to those of the human brain,
especially global workspace and higher-order theories [Dehaene et al.,
2017].)
If materialism explains consciousness entirely (without residue),
then it would be certainly true that non-biological intelligences with
super-strong AI would eventually have the same kind of inner awareness
that humans do. Moreover, as AI would break through the singularity
and become vastly more sophisticated than the human brain, it would
likely express forms of consciousness higher than we today can even
imagine. Though some speculatively reject that AI could ever become
conscious (e.g., Reber, 2016; Reber, 2018), if one takes a hard-core
physicalist position, an immutably skeptical outlook may not be war-
ranted (and may not be coherent).
To the degree that language affects the deep essence of conscious-
ness, this would make AI consciousness more likely, given the expo-
nential advances in AI language development. But language per se is
certainly not sufficient and likely not necessary.
Non-Reductive Physicalism (10). If Non-Reductive Physicalism is
true, then it would be almost certainly true that non-biological in-
telligences could eventually be conscious—although the independent
reality of mental states attenuates (slightly, unpredictably) the likeli-
hood of inner awareness—an argument that is itself countered by
functionalism (if functionalism is true). However, if strong emergence
and top-down causation were required, then both would have to be
enabled in creating AI consciousness, a process that would require two
orders of complexity (i.e., strong emergence and top-down causation as
real phenomena, and then their artificial creation).
Quantum Theories (11). If quantum mechanics is the key to con-
sciousness, with its exponential amplification of processing power and
its vast parallel pathways working simultaneously, Quantum Theories
would be the lead category for generating AI consciousness. The one
caveat, a practical but not an in-principle obstacle, would be the phys-
ical constraints of manipulating myriad quantum states, with their
inherent indeterminacies and environmental sensitivities, making the
technology even more daunting. However, the technology is acceler-
ating with fervor and so if AI consciousness is to happen, by design or by
default, Quantum Theories is likely how and where it will happen.
Integrated Information Theory (12). If consciousness requires an
independent, non-reducible feature of physical reality—say, IIT’s
“qualia space”—then it would remain an open question whether non-
biological intelligences could ever experience true inner awareness. (It
would depend on the deep nature of the consciousness-causing feature in
qualia space, and whether this feature could be controlled by
technology.)
Panpsychisms (13). If panpsychism explains consciousness such that
proto-consciousness is a non-reducible property of every elementary
physical field and particle, then it would seem likely that AI could
experience true inner awareness (because consciousness would be an
intrinsic part of the fabric of reality). Panpsychism introduces more
complexity than does materialism because panpsychism must solve its
combination problem (but this problem must be solved anyway in order
for panpsychism to be the winning theory). In addition, AI consciousness
under panpsychism turns on whether the micropsychic aspects can be
manipulated by advanced technology.
Monisms (14). Monisms, almost by definition, should pose no
problem for AI consciousness, as everything everywhere is the same
stuff. A possible exception would be if God or something like God (if it
exists) were involved.
Dualisms (15). The major holdout to AI consciousness, as I see it (at
this particular moment), would be if dualism were true and conscious-
ness requires a radically separate, nonphysical substance not causally
determined by the physical world. It would then seem impossible that
non-biological intelligences, no matter how super-strong their AI, could
ever experience true inner awareness, at least the varieties of dualism
where God or something like God was doing the creating and/or allo-
cating. Emergent dualism, where unfathomable but conceivable psy-
chophysical laws generate “souls” (or nonphysical components) based
on certain principles of physical complexity, would be an exception and
could generate AI consciousness almost as surely as materialism, though
requiring this extra process.
Idealisms (16). As Idealism holds that everything everywhere is
already consciousness in some primitive sense, that fundamental con-
sciousness is ultimate reality, then anything could be (or is) conscious
(whatever that may mean), including non-biological entities. However,
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
152
the question turns on how fundamental consciousness would be related
to personal consciousness, and if so, could even maximally advanced
technology manipulate it? (Idealist philosopher Bernardo Kastrup, also a
computer scientist, says “Conscious AI is a fantasy,” though for reasons
based mostly on current concepts of computers [Kastrup, 2023].)
Anomalous and Altered States Theories (17). Because Anomalous
and Altered States theories of consciousness require “something”
beyond, or in addition to, materialism, that “something” would ipso
facto need to generate AI consciousness. While unknowable practically,
it does not seem an insurmountable barrier conceptually. For example, it
could be the case that when a system is of a sufficient kind of complexity
it “automatically” taps into the “grid,” as it were, of another realm of
reality. Alternatively, Anomalous and Altered States theories may sim-
ply be taken, by their adherents, as evidence of Quantum, Dualism or
Idealism theories, in which case the theory of choice would determine
the possibility of AI consciousness.
To summarize, in assessing AI consciousness, here are my (tentative)
conclusions for each category: Materialism Theories: Yes. Non-Reduc-
tive physicalism: Likely. Quantum Theories: Yes (the lead category).
Integrated Information Theory: Uncertain. Panpsychism: Probably.
Monism: Likely (some). Dualism: No (mostly). Idealism: Likely. Anom-
alous and Altered States Theories: Possibly.
I agree that after super-strong AI exceeds some threshold, science
could never distinguish, not even in principle, actual inner awareness
from apparent inner awareness. But I do not agree with what often
follows: that this everlasting uncertainty about inner awareness and
conscious experience in non-biological entities makes the question
irrelevant. I think the question remains maximally relevant.
In all aspects of behavior and communications, these non-biological
intelligences, such as super-strong AI robots, would seem to be equal to
(or, more likely, superior to) humans. But if super-strong AI robots did
not, in fact, have the felt sense of inner experience, they would be
“zombies” (“philosophical zombies”), externally identical to conscious
beings, but with no mental content, nothing inside. Moreover, this dif-
ference between super-strong AI being conscious and merely appearing
conscious would become even more crucial if, by some objective stan-
dard, humanlike inner awareness conveys some kind of “intrinsic
worthiness” with moral rights and privileges.
Consider cosmos-colonizing robots driven by super-strong AI. The
stark dichotomy between conscious and non-conscious entities elicits a
probative question about self-replicating robots, which, unless we
destroy ourselves or our planet, will eventually colonize the cosmos.
Post-singularity, would super-strong AI robots without inner awareness
be in all respects as powerful as super-strong AI robots with inner
awareness, and in no respects deficient? That is, are there kinds of
cognition that, in principle or of necessity, require true inner felt
experience?
Moreover, would conscious galaxy-traversing robots, with true inner
felt experience, represent a higher form of intrinsic worthiness and ab-
solute value? I can argue that unless our robotic probes were literally
conscious, even if they were to colonize every object in the universe, the
absence of inner felt experience would mean a diminished intrinsic
worth, and, by extension, a diminished universe. For assessing the
profound nature and value of robotic probes colonizing the cosmos, for
assessing what it means to colonize the cosmos, the question of con-
sciousness is axial.
24. Virtual immortality
Virtual immortality is the theory that the fullness of our first-person
mental selves (our “I”) can be uploaded with first-person perfection to
non-biological media, so that when our mortal bodies die and our brains
dissolve, our mental selves will live on. I am all for virtual immortality
and I hope it happens (rather soon, too). Alas, I don’t think it will (not
soon, anyway). I’d deem it almost impossible for centuries, if not
millennia. Worse, virtual immortality could wind up being absolutely
impossible, forbidden in principle.
This is not the received wisdom of optimo-techno-futurists, who
believe that the exponential development of technology in general, and
of AI in particular (including the complete digital duplication of human
brains), will radically transform humanity through two revolutions. The
first is the “singularity,” when AI will redesign itself recursively and
progressively, such that it will become vastly more powerful than
human intelligence. The second, they claim, will be virtual immortality.
Virtual immortality would mark a startling, transhuman world that
optimo-techno-futurists envision as inevitable in the long run and
perhaps just over the horizon in the mid run. They do not question
whether their vision can be actualized; they only debate when it will
occur, with estimates ranging from several decades to a century or so.
I’m skeptical. I think the complexity of the science is wildly unap-
preciated, and, more fundamentally, I challenge the philosophical
foundation of the claim. Consciousness is the elephant in the room,
though many refuse to see it. They assume, almost as an article of faith,
that super-strong AI (post-singularity) will inevitably be conscious
(perhaps ipso facto). They may be correct, but to make that judgment
requires an analysis that is surely multifaceted and, I suspect, likely
inconclusive.
Whatever consciousness may be, it determines whether virtual
immortality in the strong sense of true first-person survival is even
possible. That’s why, here, to assess prospects of virtual immortality, I
do so in the context of the Landscape’s diverse categories of the expla-
nations or theories of consciousness.
First, however, there are two other potential obstacles to virtual
immortality. I consider them briefly. One is sheer complexity. What
would it take to duplicate the human brain such that our first-person
inner awareness, and all that it entails, would be not only indistin-
guishable from the original but actually identical to it?
Consider some (very) rough data for the human brain: about 86
billion neurons; 500 to 1,000 trillion synapses; about 40–130 billion
glial cells (traditionally assumed limited to metabolic support for neu-
rons, now shown also to participate in brain functions); up to 1,000
moments or “buckets” per second on every neuron for positioning action
potentials (the electrical sparks of information in neurons); 50 billion
proteins per neuron (some of which form memories); innumerable 3-
dimensional structural forms for proteins and their geometric in-
teractions; various extra-cellular molecules (some of which are involved
in brain functions). The list goes on.
How much of all of this complexity is required for total virtual
duplication such that the mental fullness of the original person can be
said to exist? Who knows?
Granted, much of the brain is not needed for consciousness and its
contents; much of the machinery of the brain is metabolic. The bodily
control mechanisms, such as regulating breathing, heart rate and
digestion would be of no value in non-biological substrates. On the other
hand, several theories of consciousness suggest that bodily sense is
needed for normal cognition (e.g., 9.6, Embodied and Enactive
Theories).
Take all the brain data together and consider all possible combina-
tions and permutations that work to generate the more than 100 billion
distinct human personalities who have ever lived (each of whom has
distinct states from moment to moment over decades of life). I hesitate to
estimate the number of specifications that would be required. How could
all these be accessed non-invasively, in sufficient detail, in real time, and
simultaneously? The technologies exceed my imagination. But in prin-
ciple, they are possible.
A second potential deterrent to virtual immortality is quantum me-
chanics, the inherent indeterminacies that could make creating a perfect
mental duplicate problematic or even impossible. After all, if quantum
events (like radioactive decay) are in principle non-predictable, how
then would it be possible to duplicate a brain perfectly?
But quantum indeterminacies exist everywhere, in bricks just as well
as in brains, so its special applicability to brain function, and hence to
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
153
virtual immortality, is questionable. The crux of the issue is at which
level in the hierarchy of causation, if any, does quantum mechanics
make necessary contributions to brain function and to consciousness?
(11). Certainly, the vast majority of neuroscientists think quantum me-
chanics works only at bedrock levels of fundamental physics, way too
low to play any special role at the higher levels where brains function
and minds happen.
This means that while the sheer complexity of the brain would deter
virtual immortality, and the indeterminacy of quantum mechanics
might be an insurmountable obstacle to perfect duplication, the former
would only delay its advent while the latter is probably not relevant.
This leaves theories of consciousness—that same elephant in the
room—which optimo-techno-futurists ignore as they plan their virtual
afterlife.
This section on Virtual Immortality follows from the previous section
on AI Consciousness. It is my conjecture that unless humanlike, first-
person inner awareness can be created in AI-empowered non-biological
intelligences, uploading one’s neural patterns and pathways, however
complete, could never preserve the original, first-person mental self (the
private “I”) and virtual immortality would be impossible. To the extent
that the case for AI consciousness can be made, the case for virtual
immortality strengthens. To the extent that the case for AI consciousness
is weak, the case for virtual immortality weakens. AI consciousness is a
necessary but not sufficient condition for virtual immortality. In other
words, virtual immortality requires the same basic conditions as does AI
consciousness, but then must add (unknown) orders of magnitude of
greater constraints and complexity.
What about well-known thought experiments where each neuron is
replaced, one at a time, by silicon chips that are perfect replicators.
Everyone would agree that replacing one neuron (of 86 billion) would
not change phenomenal consciousness. What about replacing one billion
neurons? Ten billion? All of them? Would consciousness gradually fade
and wink out? Or disappear all at once (unlikely)? Or not change at all?
John Searle, who also used the silicon chip replacement thought
experiment, thinks that “as the silicon is progressively implanted into
your dwindling brain, you find that the area of your conscious experi-
ence is shrinking, but that this shows no effect on your external
behavior” (Searle, 1992). David Chalmers, who uses “fading qualia” to
probe consciousness, thinks silicon replacement would not change
phenomenology (Chalmers, 1995a). Michael Tye, who offers four pos-
sibilities for what could happen to both phenomenology and belief,
thinks that neither would change (Tye, 2019). Ned Block thinks phe-
nomenology depends on the nature of our biological machinery (Block,
2023). I think theory of consciousness matters.
In my view, the silicon replacement thought experiment poses
another hurdle for virtual immortality. Unless Chalmers and Tye are
correct that there would be no change, virtual immortality would be
impossible.
Philosopher of mind and AI Susan Schneider warns would-be mind
uploaders that “If one opts for patternism, enhancements like uploading
are not really ‘enhancements’; they can even result in death.” Pattern-
ism, she says, is based on the computational theory of mind (9.4), which
explains “cognitive and perceptual capacities in terms of causal re-
lationships between components, each of which can be described algo-
rithmically.” One common metaphor is that “the mind is a software
program: That is, the mind is the algorithm the brain implements.”
Upload the software, you upload the mind? Not so fast. Personal iden-
tity, Schneider says, requires “spatiotemporal continuity,” such that any
uploaded entity would not be your first-person self. It would be an
“android,” she says, “an unwitting imposter.” (Schneider, 2019a,
2019b).
According to Christof Koch, “Mind-uploading will only be achievable
if computational functionalism, the metaphysical assumption that
computations, executed on a computer, are sufficient for consciousness,
holds. In this view, consciousness is simply a question of discovering the
right
algorithm. Under
a
different
metaphysical
assumption,
consciousness cannot be achieved by mere computation as it is a
structure associated with the physics of complex systems. If this is how
reality is structured, then uploading a ‘mind’ to a digital computer will
end up with a deep fake: all action without what we hold most precious,
subjective experiAs noted, virtual immortality ence” (Koch, 2024, p. 19;
12).
As noted, virtual immortality is a large leap beyond AI consciousness,
in that AI consciousness creates a new locus of consciousness whereas
virtual immortality must not only create a new locus of consciousness, it
must also reproduce with exquisite perfection a prior locus of con-
sciousness. This is why virtual immortality would require far more
advanced technology, the acquisition of which could take centuries if
not millennia or longer.
Whether virtual immortality is even possible has never changed, of
course; always it has been determined or constrained by the unchanging,
actual explanation or theory of phenomenal consciousness. We assess for
each category.
Materialism Theories (9). If Materialism Theories explain con-
sciousness entirely (without remainder), then our first-person mental
self would be uploadable and virtual immortality would be attainable.
The technology would take hundreds or thousands of years—not de-
cades as optimo-techno-futurists expect—but, barring human-wide ca-
tastrophe, virtual immortality would happen. There is no in-principle
prohibition.
If epiphenomenalism is true, then it is highly likely that virtual
immortality would be attainable. The inert “foam” of consciousness
should have little impact.
To the degree that Language affects the deep essence of conscious-
ness would make Virtual Immortality more likely, given the exponential
advances in AI language development—but it would still be only a first
step.
Relational and Representational Theories, if true, could guide
research and facilitate the technology for virtual immortality.
Non-Reductive Physicalism (10). If Non-Reductive Physicalism ex-
plains consciousness, then it is also highly likely that virtual immortality
would be attainable. The causative power of mental states should not
affect virtual immortality because a perfect duplication of the physical
states would ipso facto produce a perfect duplication of the mental
states. But if there were some strong emergence and/or top-down
causation required, then those would also have to be duplicated in the
upload.
Quantum Theories (11). If Quantum Theories are the mechanism of
consciousness, then it is likely that virtual immortality would be
attainable, because quantum mechanics is governed by highly predict-
able regularities, although the technology to do so would be more
challenging. However, the indeterminacies, intrinsic probabilistics and
strangeness of quantum physics add a degree of uncertainty that cannot
be evaluated. The test, as with all potential causes of consciousness, is
whether advanced technology can manipulate and control the cause of
consciousness, and do so comprehensively and precisely and without
meaningful error. The quantum nature of consciousness, if true, would
introduce unpredictability and perhaps undermine perfect duplicability.
For this reason, quantum theories, compared to other theories of con-
sciousness, would have relatively less success in enabling virtual
immortality than in generating AI consciousness (which is not to say it
can do either).
Stuart Hameroff thinks it is possible that “your consciousness can be
downloaded into some artificial medium as the singularity folks have
been saying for years, but without any progress whatsoever.” Refer-
encing his and Roger Penrose’s Orch OR theory of quantum conscious
(11.1), Hameroff says, “It could happen in an alternative medium that
has the proper properties,” he said, “perhaps artificial nanotubes made
of carbon fullerenes. [Creating consciousness in non-biological media]
can be done as long as you have enough mass superposition to reach
threshold in a reasonable time” (Hameroff et al., 2024).
Integrated Information Theory (12). If phenomenal consciousness
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
154
requires an independent, non-reducible feature that may take the form
of a radically new structure or organization of reality, perhaps a
different dimension of reality—as IIT postulates—then virtual immor-
tality could be possible, but it would be remain an open question
whether our first-person mental self could be uploaded. As we do not
understand this consciousness-causing structure, we could not now
know whether it could be manipulated by technology, no matter how
advanced. If this qualia space could be directed by activities in the brain,
with predictable regularities, then virtual immortality would be more
likely.
Whereas many neuroscientists assume that whole brain duplication
can achieve, ultimately, virtual immortality, Tononi and Koch do not
grant to a digital simulacrum the same consciousness we grant to a
fellow human. According to IIT, they say, “this would not be justified, for
the simple reason that the brain is real, but a simulation of a brain is
virtual.” Consciousness is a fundamental property of certain physical
systems, those that require having real cause–effect power, specifically
the power of shaping the space of possible past and future states in a way
that is maximally irreducible intrinsically.” Therefore, they conclude,
“just like a computer simulation of a giant star will not bend space–time
around the machine, a simulation of our conscious brain will not have
consciousness” (Tononi and Koch, 2015). What would most likely
happen, Tononi says, is, “you would create a perfect ‘zombie’—some-
body who acts exactly like you, somebody whom other people would
mistake for you, but you wouldn’t be there” (Tononi, 2014c).
Panpsychisms (13). If Panpsychism is true and consciousness is an
irreducible property of each and every elementary physical field and
particle, then it would seem probable that our first-person mental self
could be uploaded. There would be two reasons: (i) consciousness would
be an intrinsic part of the fabric of reality, and (ii) there would be reg-
ularities in the way particles would need to be aggregated to produce
consciousness—and if there are such regularities, then advanced tech-
nologies could learn to control them. But the question turns, again, on
whether the micropsychic forces could be harnessed and manipulated by
super-advanced technology, as can physical forces of fundamental
physics (with varying degrees of difficulty and precision).
Monisms (14): As with AI consciousness, monism’s single-stuff re-
ality should enable virtual immortality—again, unless God or something
like God (if it exists) were involved.
Dualisms (15). If Dualism is true and consciousness requires a radi-
cally separate, nonphysical substance not causally determined by the
physical world, then it would seem impossible to upload our first-person
mental self by duplicating the brain, because a necessary cause of our
consciousness, this nonphysical component, would be absent. (An
exception, again, would be Emergent Dualism [15.9], where unknown
psychophysical laws would generate “souls” or nonphysical components
“automatically.” But whether the same radically-unknown psycho-
physical laws would work equally well for virtual consciousness as for
brain-based consciousness is a further complexity.)
Idealisms (16). If consciousness is ultimate reality, then conscious-
ness would exist of itself, primitive, without any physical prerequisites.
But would the unique, comprehensive pattern of a complete physical
brain (derived, in this case, from consciousness) favor a duplication of a
specific segment of the cosmic consciousness (i.e., our unique first-per-
son mental self)? It’s not clear, in Idealism’s case, whether uploading
would make much difference (or much sense). But, again, like AI con-
sciousness under Idealism, virtual immortality under Idealism would
turn on whether hyper-technology, maximally advanced, could harness
and manipulate Idealism’s fundamental consciousness. I can argue both
sides: on the one hand, we are already composed of the same con-
sciousness, so duplication is facilitated; on the other hand, the proba-
bility of being able to manipulate fundamental consciousness does not
feel high.
Anomalous and Altered States Theories (17). As with AI conscious-
ness, because Anomalous and Altered States theories of consciousness
require “something” beyond, or in addition to, materialism, that
“something” would be necessary but not sufficient to enable virtual
immortality. However, given that almost every Anomalous and Altered
States theory of consciousness already has ample (theoretical) resources
to provide its own form or forms of immortality (supposedly), virtual
immortality under Anomalous and Altered States theories would seem
moot. After all, if you get the “real thing,” why worry about “virtual?”
To summarize, in pursuit of virtual immortality, here are my
(tentative) conclusions for each category of theories of consciousness.
Materialism Theories: Yes. Non-Reductive Physicalism: Likely. Quantum
Theories: Probably (with uncertainty). Panpsychism: Probably. Monism:
Likely (some). Dualism: No (mostly). Idealism: Likely. Anomalous and
Altered States theories: Not needed.
Any theory, of course, would need to take on board all the brain-
based complexities noted earlier, much underappreciated by optimo-
techno-futurists.
In trying to distinguish among these alternative theories of con-
sciousness, and thus assess the viability of virtual immortality, I am
troubled by a simple observation. Assume that a perfect duplication of
my brain does, in fact, generate my first-person consciousness—which is
the minimum requirement for virtual immortality. This would mean that
my first-person self and personal awareness could be uploaded to a new
medium (non-biological or even, for that matter, a new biological body).
But here’s the problem: If “I” can be duplicated once, then I can be
duplicated twice; and if twice, then an unlimited number of times.
What happens to my current first-person inner awareness? What
happens to my “I”? Assume I do the duplication procedure and it works
perfectly—say, five times. Where is my first-person inner awareness
located? Where am I? Each of the five duplicates would state with
indignant certainty that he is “Robert Kuhn,” and no one could dispute
any of them. (For simplicity of the argument, physical appearances of
the clones are neutralized.) Inhabiting my original body, I would also
claim to be the real “me,” but I could not prove my priority. (David
Brin’s novel Kiln People is a thought experiment about “duplicates,” and
personal identity [Brin, 2003].)
I’ll frame the question more precisely. Compare my inner awareness
from right before to right after the duplication process. Will I, the
original, feel or sense differently? Here are four duplication scenarios,
with their implications:
1. I do not sense any difference in my first-person awareness. This
would mean that the five duplicates are like super-identical
twins—they are independent conscious entities, such that each, after
his creation, begins instantly to diverge from the others. This would
imply that consciousness is the local expression or manifestation of a
set of physical factors or patterns. (An alternative explanation would
be that the duplicates are zombies, with no inner awareness—a
charge, of course, they would angrily deny.)
2. My first-person awareness suddenly has six parts—my original and
the five duplicates in different locations—and they all somehow
merge or blur together into a single conscious frame, the six
conscious entities fusing into a single composite (if not coherent)
“picture.” In this way, the unified effect of my six conscious centers
would be like the “binding problem” on steroids.70 This could mean
that consciousness has some kind of overarching presence or a kind
of supra-physical structure.
3. My personal first-person awareness shifts from one conscious entity
to another, or fragments, or fractionates. These states are logically (if
remotely) possible, but only, I think, if consciousness would be an
imperfect, incomplete expression of evolution, devoid of deep
grounding.
70 The binding problem asks how our separate sense modalities like sight and
sound come together such that our normal conscious experience feels singular
and smooth, not built up from discrete, disparate elements.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
155
4. My personal first-person awareness disappears upon duplication;
although each of the six (five plus original) claims to be the original
and really believes it, in fact none is. (This, too, would make con-
sciousness even more mysterious.)
For my money (or my life), I’d bet on Scenario 1. But if Scenario 1 is
correct, then have “I,” the original “I,” achieved virtual immortality? No.
I have a bunch of super-identical twins, an enlarged family, but no
virtual immortality for “me.”
Suppose, after the duplicates are made, the original (me) is
destroyed. What then? Almost certainly my first-person awareness
would vanish, although each of the five duplicates would assert un-
abashedly that he is the real “Robert Kuhn” and would advise, perhaps
smugly, not to fret over the deceased and discarded original.
There’s a further implication of virtual immortality, and an odd one,
relating to the possibility that super-strong AI, cosmos-colonizing robots
could become conscious (see previous section). I can make the case that
such galaxy-traveling, consciousness-bearing entities could include
you—yes, you!—your first-person inner awareness exploring the cosmos
virtually and (almost) forever. Here’s the argument. If AI consciousness
and virtual immortality are possible, then human first-person con-
sciousness and personality can be uploaded (ultimately) into space
probes and we ourselves can colonize the cosmos!
If virtual immortality is possible, I’d see no reason why we couldn’t
choose where we would like our virtual immortality to be housed, and if
we choose a cosmos-colonizing robot, we could experience the galactic
journeys through robotic senses (while at the same time enjoying our
virtual world, especially during those eons of dead time traveling be-
tween star systems).
At some time in the (far) future, scientists will likely assure us that
the technology is up and running. If I were around, would I believe the
scientists and upload my consciousness? Moreover, entranced by what I
assume will be AI-enhanced commercial advertisements, would I select a
cosmos-colonizing robot as my medium of storage so that I could spend
my virtual immortality touring the galaxy? I might, if only I’d be
confident that a theory of consciousness that allows duplication is true
and that the duplication procedure would not affect my first-person
mental self one whit. (I sure wouldn’t let them destroy the original,
though the duplicates may call for it.)
So, while all the duplicates wouldn’t feel like me (as I know me), I’d
kind of enjoy sending “Robert Kuhn” out there exploring star systems
galore.
There’s more. If my consciousness is entirely physical and can be
uploaded without degradation, then it can be uploaded without degra-
dation to as many cosmos-colonizing robots as I’d like—or can afford. It
gets crazy. Which makes me think there is something irreparably wrong
with duplicates in specific and perhaps with virtual immortality in
general.
Whether non-biological entities such as robots can be conscious, or
not, presents us with two disjunctive possibilities, each with profound
consequences. If robots can never be conscious, then there may be a
greater moral imperative for human beings to colonize the cosmos. If
robots can be conscious, then there may be less reason for humans, with
our fragile bodies, to explore space—but your personal consciousness
could be uploaded into cosmos-colonizing robots, probably into innu-
merable such galactic probes, and you yourself (or your mental clones)
could colonize the cosmos.
My intuition, for what it’s worth, is that it’s all a pipedream. I deem
virtual immortality for my first-person inner awareness to be not
possible as a practical matter (given any hyper-technology), and perhaps
to be never possible in principle. Does this commit me to a form of
dualism? I’m not comfortable with the pigeonhole. But confident in my
conclusion, I am not.
While in the (far) future, we may find a way to convince ourselves
that duplication really works, for me for now, I’m convinced of only this:
Virtual immortality, like AI consciousness, must face the explanations
and theories on the Landscape of Consciousness.
25. Survival beyond death
This section is somewhat repetitive. The reason is not just because
there is absence of real knowledge about survival beyond death, which is
obvious (to some), but also because what follows from each explanation
or theory of consciousness with respect to survival is reasonably clear
(even if, in some cases, ambiguous).
Materialism Theories (9). Death of the brain and body is death of the
person, irrevocable and permanent non-existence. The conventional-
wisdom way to maintain post-mortem, first-person subjectivity under
Materialism Theories would be virtual immortality via hyper-advanced
technology (see the previous section). Another possibility comes from
the four-dimensional block universe interpretation of fundamental
physics (the fourth dimension being time). As Albert Einstein wrote to
the family of his friend, Michele Besso, who had just died: “Now he has
departed this strange world a little ahead of me. That signifies nothing.
For us believing physicists, the distinction between past, present and
future is only a stubbornly persistent illusion.”
Generic Subjective Continuity (9.8.13). Naturalistic conceptions of
consciousness, personhood, and self, tied to a physicalist picture of
consciousness dependent on the brain, would seem to make it impos-
sible, even ludicrous, to sustain the hypothesis that one’s particular
personal consciousness survives the dissolution of the brain upon death.
Nevertheless, some (Clark, T., 1994) have proposed that at death we
should anticipate not the onset of oblivion or nothingness, but the
continuation of consciousness—however, not in the context of the per-
son who dies. Such “generic subjective continuity” suggests that con-
sciousness, albeit tied to specific physical instantiations, never finds
itself absent. One might stretch to find resonances with aspects of some
Eastern eschatologies. (That this may or may not be welcomed by those
facing death—many of whom have the hope of first-person-continuity
life after death, and some of whom may prefer the onset of oblivion, not
the continuation of experience in other contexts—is way beyond the
scope of this Landscape.)
Non-Reductive Physicalism (10). Whereas death under Materialism/
physicalism means total extinction of mind and consciousness, under
some forms of Non-Reductive Physicalism, with mind not reducible, it is
possible that God (if there is a God), or something like God, could bring
the person back to life, a radical process often labeled “resurrection”
(10.3).
Quantum Theories (11). If consciousness comes about via specialized
quantum processes, then, at least superficially, death is still death as it is
in materialism. However, looking deeper, the strange, counterintuitive
nature of quantum theory introduces the possibility of radically new
levels or realms of existence, such as the many-worlds interpretation and
alternative world histories selected by future events. It is still hard to
imagine how any of this could provide first-person survival beyond
death to my inner “I” that feels and senses now.
Integrated Information Theory (12). If phenomenal consciousness
requires a radically new structure or organization of reality, perhaps a
different dimension of reality, then what happens to these inscrutable
things cannot be imagined and their potential permanence in some sense
cannot be rejected. This does not mean that IIT espouses or even allows
life after death. What it does is highlight the mystery and importance of
consciousness, which leaves the door to survival perhaps a crack more
open.
Panpsychisms (13). If all aspects of the world are infused with con-
sciousness, then solving the combination problem—how myriad
microscopic panpsychic elements coalesce to form a macroscopic con-
sciousness—could enable novel ideas about what may happen when the
process reverses, when the macroscopic consciousness dissolves with the
dissolution of the brain. It seems a long-long shot to first-person survival,
but for some kind of survival, not in principle impossible.
Monisms (14). Having one kind of fundamental stuff makes ultimate
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
156
reality simpler, suggesting perhaps that some kinds of monism may
facilitate survival. For example, John Polkinghorne’s “dual-aspect
monism” enables a resurrection.
Dualisms (15). With its nonphysical soul or spirit independent of the
body being the “real you,” dualism provides the clearest mechanism for
survival beyond death. As such, dualism dominates religious traditions
and spiritual systems. In addition to resurrection (Abrahamic religions of
Judaism, Christianity, Islam) and reincarnation (Eastern traditions,
especially Hinduism and Buddhism), the vast majority of religious be-
lievers are sure that our individual soul or first-person awareness will,
post-mortem, immediately be resident in some other realm. Popularity
does not make truth, of course, but it is a data point. To reflect on
dualism in reverse: If we knew counterfactually that survival beyond
death was indeed a true fact of the world, we would likely infer that
some kind of dualism is making it happen.
Idealism (16). Idealism allows survival beyond death because if
everything fundamentally is consciousness, and thus consciousness is
the ground of all being, then a nexus between our individual con-
sciousnesses and the ultimate or cosmic consciousness can be readily
imagined. (Parsimony is nice but not dispositive.) Indeed, Eastern re-
ligions have survival as fundamental doctrine, usually in forms and
systems of reincarnation. However, survival under Idealism usually does
not mean survival of one’s current first-person awareness, but rather
some kind of consciousness expansion (Kastrup, 2016a,b) or diffusion,
like a person’s one drop of personal consciousness absorbed back into
the infinite ocean of cosmic consciousness from which it came. The issue
of the afterlife in Indian philosophy is framed sharply by the question
whether we will “eat sugar” (maintain our first-person identity) or “be
sugar” (absorbed back into cosmic consciousness, lose our first-person
identity) (Medhananda, 2023).
Anomalous and Altered States Theories (17). Survival beyond death
of personal consciousness in some form is a prime feature of Anomalous
and Altered States theories. Almost all categories of psi/paranormal (i.
e., NDEs, OBEs, ESP, parapsychology, past lives) have “life after
death”—if not as its central doctrine (which some do), then at least as a
major aspect. Whether “communicating” with dead relatives in s´eances
or “remembering” past lives via hypnosis, survival gets attention. In fact,
survival is a main motivating reason why people are attracted to psi/
paranormal phenomena in the first place.
To summarize, in pursuit of survival beyond death, here are my
(tentative) conclusions for each category of theories of consciousness:
Materialism: No, with possible exceptions for virtual immortality and a
four-dimensional block universe. Non-Reductive physicalism: Unlikely
(possible exception: resurrection). Quantum Theories: Maybe (even if
so, it would be in formal, abstract ways of uncertain meaning). Pan-
psychism: Unlikely (long shot). Monism: Unlikely (possible exception:
resurrection). Dualism: Yes, with first-person consciousness preserved.
Idealism: Yes, with first-person consciousness blurred or banished.
Anomalous and Altered States theories: Yes. Generic subjective conti-
nuity: No, but consciousness survives death in a generic, not a personal
sense.
I remain eagerly though skeptically open to speculation. I won’t fool
myself.
26. Reflections
When I did my PhD in neurophysiology (mid-1960s), I felt somewhat
embarrassed, as an apprentice scientist, to be seen taking consciousness
seriously. I’m now proud of it, though it’s no longer risky. There is today
great interest in consciousness among scientists—some, in context of AI
potentially becoming conscious, calling the issue “urgent” (Lenharo,
2024).
I appreciate Christof Koch pioneering neural correlates of con-
sciousness; David Chalmers challenging conventional wisdom in phi-
losophy of mind; and John Leslie, from whom I’ve learned much,
showing me new ways to think about ultimate matters. I admire two
physicists who have long taken consciousness seriously. Paul Davies
suspects that the universe is “about” something and that consciousness is
no accident. Andrei Linde was advised to take the word “consciousness”
out of a cosmology manuscript so that fellow scientists wouldn’t lose
respect for him. Andrei responded, “If I take ‘consciousness’ out, I’d lose
respect for myself.”
Artist/philosopher Mariusz Stanowski, on seeing an early pre-proof
of this paper, challenged my statement that “whatever the ultimate
explanation of consciousness, it is somewhere, somehow, embedded in
this Landscape of theories." He argues that “creativity is producing
coherent structures/syntheses as opposed to producing collections. Your
article is such a collection of views on consciousness and your comment
doesn’t change that. The solution lies outside this landscape.” (Sta-
nowski’s own “theory of contrasts” offers “direct contact with reality”
where coherent structures are built from simple elements, gradually
increasing in complexity,” such that “complexity means integration,
value and goodness” [Stanowski, 2021]).
To be clear, I am not saying that the ultimate theory is already here
on the Landscape, hidden in plain sight, but rather whatever the ulti-
mate theory turns out to be, its fundamental elements could be cate-
gorized according to Landscape structure, with family resemblances to
some current theories.
I turn again to Jerry Fodor and his pithy appraisal of consciousness
theories: “Nobody has the slightest idea how anything material could be
conscious. Nobody even knows what it would be like to have the
slightest idea about how anything material could be conscious” (Fodor,
1992).
Scanning the Landscape, I’d like to say we have progressed. I’m not
sure I can.
Those who write about consciousness like to quote, with bemused
irony, psychologist Stuart Sutherland’s cautionary words: “Conscious-
ness is a fascinating but elusive phenomenon; it is impossible to specify
what it is, what it does, or why it evolved. Nothing worth reading has
been written on it” (Sutherland, 1989).
Slyly, we all hope to be the exception. More likely we corroborate
that Sutherland had us all nailed.
Philosopher William Hirstein is more optimistic. In response to the
early Landscape pre-proof, he noted, “You cast a broad net (you even
caught me!), which is exactly what’s needed at this point. Also, taken all
together, it [Landscape] provides a fascinating look at the whole of
human intelligence coming up against a problem, one that is vital for us.
The diversity of these views is part of a larger point that, as a species,
diversity is our strength: we each tackle problems in our unique ways,
and (hopefully) someone will win the lottery. Moreover, a goodly per-
centage of the views are inter-consistent: just touching different parts of
the same elephant” (Hirstein, 2024).
Me, I just don’t know … My own hunch, right here, right now—if I’m
coerced to disclose it and for what little it’s worth—might be something
of a Dualism-Idealism mashup.71 (I can describe; I dare not defend.)
Note to readers
Feedback is appreciated, critique too—especially explanations or
theories of consciousness not included, or not described accurately, or
not classified properly; also, improvements of the classification
typology.
I look forward to providing updates and making revisions. This
Landscape of Consciousness is a work-in-process—permanently.
71 Second place might go to some form of Quantum Consciousness, triggered
by writing this paper and surprising me. Third place, counterintuitively, to a
kind of Eliminative Materialism/Illusionism, combined with Neurobiological
and Representational Theories.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
157
Declaration of competing interest
None.
Acknowledgements
For over 25 years, Closer To Truth, public television series and global
resource—the Closer To Truth website and Closer To Truth YouTube
channel—has been a central part of my life and Closer To Truth in-
terviews are a primary source for this Landscape of Consciousness. Peter
Getzels is the co-creator, producer and director of Closer To Truth and I
am pleased to acknowledge him first. Peter and I have been working
together since 2006, producing and broadcasting over 300 TV episodes
(and counting) and over 5,000 web videos. It is hard to overstate the
complexity of a Closer To Truth TV episode, for which Peter is respon-
sible: planning relevant and visually interesting filming locations;
organizing large crews (12–15 members) and complex equipment;
coordinating guest logistics; and managing the myriad steps in post-
production hands-on. Most important, Peter’s creativity in the edit,
integrating sophisticated knowledge of the content with engaging im-
agery and music.
For astute comments and enhancing ideas for the Landscape, and for
the superb graphic of the Landscape (Fig. 3), my special thanks to Alex
Gomez-Marin. For feedback on the manuscript, thanks to Thomas Clark,
Philip Goff, George Ellis, Edward Kelly, Sean Slocum, and Galen
Strawson—and to a global band of volunteer proofreaders. For addi-
tional theories, thanks to Mois´es Alvarez, Alex Gomez-Marin, Kevin
McLeod, and Uziel Awret. For technical support, thanks to Joshua
Favara and Sean Slocum. My appreciation to an anonymous reviewer for
very helpful suggestions. My appreciation to the superb Elsevier pro-
duction team, led by journal manager Sridhar Venkataraman.
I express deep appreciation to friends and colleagues, largely phi-
losophers and scientists, who over the years have enriched my appre-
ciation and understanding of consciousness and all that relates to it,
including (alphabetically): Ned Block, David Chalmers, Paul Davies,
Daniel Dennett, Christof Koch, John Leslie, Colin McGinn, Marvin
Minsky, Yujin Nagasawa, Roger Penrose, John Searle, Galen Strawson,
Richard Swinburne, Raymond Tallis, Peter van Inwagen. In addition
(alphabetically): Scott Aaronson, W. Ross Adey, David Albert, Nancy
Andreasen, Robert Audi, Uziel Awret, Francisco Ayala, Julian Baggini,
Philip Bard, Deirdre Barrett, Justin Barrett, Roy Baumeister, Tim Bayne,
Barry Beyerstein, Simon Blackburn, Susan Blackmore, Colin Blakemore,
Joseph Bogen, Nick Bostrom, Stephen Braude, Mary Brazier, David Brin,
Rodney Brooks, Leslie Brothers, Warren Brown, Bernard Carr, Sean
Carroll, Gregory Chaitin, Anjan Chatterjee, Noam Chomsky, Stephen
Chorover, Patricia Churchland, Deepak Chopra, Andy Clark, Thomas
Clark, Philip Clayton, Carmine Clemente, Sarah Coakley, Eric Courch-
esne, William Lane Craig, Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Antonio Damasio,
Andrew Davis, Helen De Cruz, Terrence Deacon, David Deutsch, Diana
Deutsch, Edward de Bono, Helen De Cruz, Terrence Deacon, Hubert
Dreyfus, John Duprey, Freeman Dyson, David Eagleman, George Ellis,
Robert Epstein, Christopher Evans, Edward Feser, Jerry Fodor, Jerome
D. Frank, Jay Garfield, George Geis, Marcello Gleiser, Peter Gobets,
Peter Godfrey-Smith, Phillip Goff, Rebecca Newberger Goldstein, `Alex
G´omez-Marín, Alison Gopnik, Michael Graziano, Susan Greenfield,
Stephen Grossberg, Stuart Hameroff, David Bentley Hart, William
Hirstein, Donald Hoffman, Jim Holt, John Horgan, Nicholas Humphrey,
Christopher Isham, Jenann Ismael, John Iversen, Michael James, Tao
Jiang, Brian Josephson, Menas Kafatos, Subhash Kak, Bernardo Kastrup,
Stuart Kauffman, Edward Kelly, Lawrence Krauss, Raymond Kurzweil,
George Lakoff, Stephen Law, Joseph LeDoux, Brian Leftow, Bruce Levy,
John Liebeskind, Andrei Linde, Rodolfo Llinas, Elisabeth Lloyd, Peter
Loewenberg, Barry Loewer, Elizabeth Loftus, Andrew Ter Ern Loke, Uri
Maoz, Elizabeth Margulis, Kelsey Martin, John Mazziotta, Ernan
McMullin, Patrick McNamara, Swami Medhananda, Alfred Mele,
Michael Merzenich, Ken Mogi, James Mosso, J.P. Moreland, Vernon
Mountcastle, Nancey Murphy, Michael Murray, George Musser, Thomas
Nagel, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Denis Noble, Alva No¨e, Sherwin Nuland,
Timothy O’Connor, Don Page, Derek Parfit, Sam Parnia, Sudip Patra,
Franklin Perkins, Sara Manning Peskin, Massimo Pigliucci, Alvin Plan-
tinga, John Polkinghorne, Dean Radin, V.S. Ramachandran, Varadaraja
V. Raman, Martin Rees, Alex Rosenberg, Adina Roskies, Michael Ruse,
Robert Russell, John Sanfey, Swami Sarvapriyananda, Arnold Scheibel,
John Schlag, Marilyn Schlitz, Jonathan Schooler, Erin Schuman, Eric
Schwitzgebel, Aaron Segal, Terrance Sejnowski, Anil Seth, Alan Shapiro,
David Shatz, Rupert Sheldrake, Michael Shermer, Eduard Shyfrin, Todd
Siler, Barry Smith, Huston Smith, Lee Smolin, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong,
Henry Stapp, Robert Stickgold, Eleonore Stump, Joshua Swamidass,
James Tobin, Simone Schnall, Ganapathy Subramaniam, Charles Tart,
Max Tegmark, Paul Thagard, Neil Theise, Evan Thompson, William
Irwin Thompson, Alan Tobin, Giulio Tononi, John Torday, Mark Tramo,
Robert Trivers, Peter Tse, Bas van Fraassen, David Wallace, Roger
Walsh, Keith Ward, Thalia Wheatley, Fred Alan Wolf, Stephen Wolfram,
Yang Xiao, Yifa, Gino Yu, Hamza Yusuf, Eran Zaidel, Carol Zaleski,
Semir Zeki, Dean Zimmerman, among others—almost all of whom
appear on Closer To Truth.
References
Aaronson, Scott., 2014a. Why I Am not an integrated information theorist (or, the
unconscious expander). Shtetel-Optimized. https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1799.
Aaronson, Scott, 2014b. Giulio Tononi and me: a phi-nal exchange. Shtetel-Optimized.
https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1823.
Aaronson, Scott, 2014c. What Things are Conscious? Closer To Truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/aarsc-011/?referrer=7787. Scott Aaronson on Closer To Truth—14
CTT videos and 3 CTT TV episodes—. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/scott-
aaronson/.
Albahari, Miri, 2019a. Perennial idealism: a mystical solution to the mind-body problem.
Philosophers’ Impr. 19 (44).
Albahari, Miri, 2019b. Beyond cosmopsychism and the great I Am: how the world might
be grounded in universal ‘advaitic’ consciousness. In: Seager, William (Ed.), The
Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. Routledge, pp. 119–130.
Alexander, Eben, 2014. Proof of Heaven: A Neurosurgeon’s Journey into the Afterlife.
Simon & Schuster.
Alter, Torin, 2003. Jackson’s Retraction, III-W. apaOnline: Proceedings and Addresses
January, 2003, vol. 76, 3. https://web.archive.org/web/20080516091824/. http
://www.apa.udel.edu/apa/publications/proceedings/v76n3/public/abstracts.asp.
Alter, Torin, Nagasawa, Yujin, 2012. What is russellian monism? J. Conscious. Stud.
September 2012.
Alter, Torin, Pereboom, Derk, 2019. Russellian monism. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2019 Edition). https://plato.stanford.ed
u/archives/fall2019/entries/russellian-monism/.
Altered state of consciousness, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last
revision: 1 december 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Altered_s
tate_of_consciousness&oldid=1187748959.
Ambron, Richard, 2022. The Brain and Pain; Breakthroughs in Neuroscience. Columbia
University Press.
Ambron, Richard, 2023a. How we experience pain may unlock the mystery of
consciousness. Research Outreach,137. https://researchoutreach.org/articles/how-e
xperience-pain-may-unlock-mystery-consciousness/.
Ambron, Richard, 2023b. Toward the unknown: consciousness and pain. Neurosci.
Consciousness 1, niad002. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niad002.
Anastassiou, C., Perin, R., Markram, H., Koch, C., 2011. Ephaptic coupling of cortical
neurons. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 217–223. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2727, 2011.
Andrews, Kristen, 2020a. The Animal Mind: an Introduction to the Philosophy of Animal
Cognition, second ed. Routledge.
Andrews, Kristen, 2020b. How to Study Animal Minds. Cambridge University Press.
Andrews, Kristen, 2023. What is it like to be a crab? Aeon. 20 November 2023. htt
ps://aeon.co/essays/are-we-ready-to-study-consciousness-in-crabs-and-the-like.
Andrews, Kristen, Birch, Jonathan, 2023. What has feelings? Aeon. 23 February 2023.
https://aeon.co/essays/to-understand-ai-sentience-first-understand-it-in-animals.
Aranyosi, Istv´an. Mind-Brain Identity Theory. PhilPapers. https://philpapers.org/brow
se/mind-brain-identity-theory.
Aru, J., et al., 2020. Cellular mechanisms of conscious processing. Trends Cognit. Sci. 24
(10). October 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.07.006.
Aru, J., et al., 2023. Primer on the Dendritic Integration Theory of Consciousness.
PsyArXiv, 7 Feb. 2023. https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/vkdt2.
Atmanspacher, Harald, 2020a. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), Quantum Approaches to
Consciousness", the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 Edition). URL
=. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/qt-consciousness/.
Atmanspacher, Harald, 2020b. The Pauli–Jung conjecture and its relatives: a formally
augmented outline. Open Philosop. 3 (1), 527–549. https://doi.org/10.1515/opphil-
2020-0138.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
158
Atmanspacher, Harald, Fuchs, Christopher A., 2014. Introduction. In:
Atmanspacher, Harald, Fuchs, Christopher A. (Eds.), The Pauli–Jung Conjecture and
its Impact Today, 2017 ed. Imprint Academic, pp. 1–6.
Atmanspacher, Harald, Rickles, Dean, 2022. Dual-Aspect Monism and the Deep Structure
of Meaning. Routledge.
Awret, Uziel, 2022. Holographic duality and the physics of consciousness. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2022.685699, 15 March 2022 Volume 16 -
2022.
Awret, Uziel, 2024. Personal Communication.
Baars, Bernard, 1988. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Baars, Bernard, 1997. In the Theater of Consciousness. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
Baars, Bernard, 2002. The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence.
Trends Cognit. Sci. 6 (1), 47–52.
Baars, Bernard, Edelman, David, 2012. Consciousness, biology and quantum hypotheses.
Phys. Life Rev. 9 (3), 285–294, 2012 Sep.
Baars, Bernard J., Geld, Natalie, Kozma, Robert, 2021. Global workspace theory (GWT)
and prefrontal cortex: recent developments. Front. Psychol., 10 November 2021. Sec.
Consciousness Res. 12 https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.749868, 2021.
Bach, Joscha, 2019. The cortical conductor theory: towards addressing consciousness in
AI models. Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Meeting of the BICA Society. In: http
://cadia.ru.is/workshops/aga2017/proceedings/AGA_2017_Bach.pdf.
Baker, Lynne Rudder, 2005. Death and the afterlife. In: Wainwright, William (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion. Oxford University Press.
Bandyopadhyay, Anirban, 2014. Quantum Physics of Consciousness. Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/banan-005/?referrer=7937.
Barnard, William, 2011. Living Consciousness: the Metaphysical Vision of Henri Bergson.
State University of New York Press.
Barrett, Justin, 2000. Exploring the natural foundations of religion. Trends Cognit. Sci. 4
(Issue 1).
Barrett, Justin, 2012. Does Evolutionary Psychology Undermine Religion. Closer To
Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/barj2-005/?referrer=8011. Justin Barrett
on Closer To Truth—20 CTT videos and 4 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.co
m/contributor/justin-barrett/.
Computational Theory of Mind, Closer To Truth videos (n.d.) with Rodney, n.d.. Brooks,
Andy Clark, Donald Hoffman, Susan Greenfield, Peter Tse, Anirban Bandyopadhyay,
Ken Mogi. https://closertotruth.com/video/broro-003/?referrer=8107.
Bayne, Tim, 2007. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/bayti-009/?referrer=7971. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/t
im-bayne/. See Tim Bayne on Closer To Truth—9 CTT videos and 3 CTT TV episodes.
Beck, Friedrich, Eccles, John, 1992. Quantum aspects of brain activity and the role of
consciousness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 11357–11361.
Beck, Friedrich, Eccles, John, 1998. Quantum processes in the brain: a scientific basis of
consciousness. Cognit. Stud. 5 (2), 95–109.
Beggs, John, 2023. When does the brain operate at peak performance? Quanta Magazine.
https://www.quantamagazine.org/a-physical-theory-for-when-the-brain-performs-
best-20230131/. (Accessed 31 January 2023).
Bergson, Henri, 1889. Time and Free Will: an Essay on the Immediate Data of
Consciousness Paperback (Bergson’s doctoral dissertation.).
Bergson, Henri, 1896. Matter and Memory, 1990 (Mati`ere et M´emoire, 1896), 1990.
translators N.M. Paul and W.S. Palmer. Zone Books.
Bergson, Henri, 1920. Life and Consciousness. Mind-Energy. Henry Holt and Company.
Berkovich-Ohana, A., Dor-Ziderman, Y., Trautwein, F.-M., Schweitzer, Y., Nave, O.,
Fulder, S., Ataria, Y., 2020. The Hitchhiker’s guide to neurophenomenology – the
case of studying self boundaries with meditators. Front. Psychol. 11, 1680.
Berwick, Robert, Chomsky, Noam, 2016. Why Only Us: Language and Evolution. The
MIT Press.
Bicameral mentality, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 11
March 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bicameral_mentalit
y&oldid=1213220521.
Bicameral Mind. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.
Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision 17 February 2024. https://en.wi
kipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Origin_of_Consciousness_in_the_Breakdown_of_
the_Bicameral_Mind&oldid=1170999744.
Bigelow, Robert, 2023. The Bigelow Institute for consciousness studies (BICS). htt
ps://www.bigelowinstitute.org (Personal communications).
Bilimoria, Edi (n.d.) Edi Bilimoria website. https://edibilimoria.com.
Bilimoria, Edi, 2022. Unfolding consciousness: exploring the living universe and
intelligent powers in nature and humans. Shepheard-Walwyn I – IV. https://edibil
imoria.com/unfolding-consciousness/ (Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin for suggesting
Ed Bilimoria).
Birth, Jonathan, 2023. Consciousness and the Overton window of science, Part I. Brains
Blog. https://philosophyofbrains.com/2023/09/11/consciousness-and-the-overton-
window-of-science-part-1.aspx.
Bitbol, Michel, 2012. Neurophenomenology, an ongoing practice of/in consciousness.
Construct. Foundations 7 (3), 165–173.
Bitbol, Michel, 2015. Review of waking, dreaming, being: Self and Consciousness in
neuroscience, meditation, and philosophy by evan Thompson. J. Mind Behav., Winter
Spring 2015 36 (1/2), 101–111. https://www.jstor.org/stable/43854365.
Bitbol, Michel, 2020. A phenomenological ontology for physics: Merleau-ponty and
qbism. In: Wiltsche, H., Berghofer, P. (Eds.), Phenomenological Approaches to
Physics.
Bitbol, Michel, 2021a. The tangled dialectic of body and consciousness: a metaphysical
counterpart of radical neurophenomenology. Construct. Foundations 16, 141–151
(Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin for suggesting Michel Bitbol).
Bitbol, Michel, 2021b. Is the life-world reduction sufficient in quantum physics?
Continent. Philos. Rev. (4), 1–18.
Bitbol, Michel, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 20 October
2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michel_Bitbol&oldid=1181
008425.
Bitbol, Michel, Antonova, E., 2016. On the too often overlooked radicality of
neurophenomenology. Construct. Foundations 11 (2), 354–356.
Bitbol, Michel, Petitmengin, Claire, 2017. Neurophenomenology and the micro-
phenomenological interview. In: Schneider, Susan, Velmans, Max (Eds.), The
Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Wiley, 2017.
Blackburn, Simon, 2012. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/blasi-009/?referrer=7827. Simon Blackburn on Closer To Truth—14 CTT
videos and 7 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/simon-b
lackburn/.
Blackmore, Susan, 2002. Why I have given up. In: Kurtz, P. (Ed.), Skeptical Odysseys:
Personal Accounts by the World’s Leading Paranormal Inquirers. Prometheus Books,
pp. 85–94, 2001. https://www.susanblackmore.uk/chapters/why-i-have-given-up/.
Blackmore, Susan, 2007. Why is consciousness so mysterious? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/blasu-006/?referrer=8151. Susan Blackmore on Closer
To Truth—18 CTT videos and 9 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contrib
utor/susan-blackmore/.
Blackmore, Susan, 2023. How do two new books on consciousness close in on the elusive
field? NewScientist. https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg26034660-400-how
-do-two-new-books-on-consciousness-close-in-on-the-elusive-field/.
Blakemore, Colin, 2012a. Language and consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closerto
truth.com/video/blaco-006/?referrer=8015. Colin Blakemore on Closer To
Truth—10 CTT videos and 4 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contribut
or/colin-blakemore/.
Blakemore, Colin, 2012b. Are brains and minds the same thing? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/blaco-001/?referrer=8492.
Block, Ned, 1980. What is functionalism? Block, Ned, ed.. In: Readings in the Philosophy
of Psychology. Harvard University Press.
Block, Ned, 2007a. What is the essence of consciousness? Closer to truth. Ned Block on
Closer To Truth —23 CTT videos and 8 CTT TV episodes—. https://closertotruth.
com/contributor/ned-block/.
Block, Ned, 2007b. What Is Functionalism? Consciousness, Function, and Representation.
The MIT Press.
Block, Ned, 2007c. Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and
neuroscience. Behav. Brain Sci. 30481–30499. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0140525X07002786.
Block, Ned, 2008. Functional reduction. In: Sabat´es, M., Sosa, D., Horgan, T. (Eds.),
Supervenience in Mind: A Festschrift for Jaegwon Kim. The MIT Press. https://www.
academia.edu/2744912/Functional_reduction.
Block, Ned, 2014. Language and consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/blone-017/?referrer=8015.
Block, Ned, 2023. The Border between Seeing and Thinking. Oxford University Press.
Bohm, David (n.d.) ‘Wholeness and the Implicate Order’ by David Bohm – A masterpiece
of thinking. Wise Insights Forum. Retrieved: 16 March 2024. https://wiseinsights
forum.com/wholeness-and-the-implicate-order/.
Bohm, David, 1980. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge.
Bohm, David, Hiley, Basil, 1993. The Undivided Universe: an Ontological Interpretation
of Quantum Theory. Routledge.
Bollinger, Terry, 2023. An unexpectedly specific theory of consciousness. Apabistia Notes
2023-04-16.1630 (2023). https://sarxiv.org/apa.2023-04-26.1630.pdf.
Bostrom, Nick, 2003. Are you living in a computer simulation? Phil. Q. 53 (211),
243–255, 2003. https://simulation-argument.com/simulation.pdf.
Bostrom, Nick, 2006. Quantity of experience: brain-duplication and degrees of
consciousness. Minds Mach. 16, 185–200. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-006-
9036-0.
Bourget, David; Chalmers, David, general eds. PhilPapers. https://philpapers.org/browse
/theories-of-consciousness.
Bourget, David, Chalmers, David, 2014. What do philosophers believe? Phil. Stud. 170
(3), 465–500.
Bourget, David, Chalmers, David, 2023. Philosophers on Philosophy: the 2020
PhilPapers Survey. Philosophers’ Imprint. https://philarchive.org/archive
/BOUPOP-3.
Boyer, Pascal, 2001. Religion Explained: the Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought.
Basic Books.
Braude, Stephen, 1992. Survival or super-psi? J. Sci. Explor. 6 (2), 127–144.
Braude, Stephen, 2007a. What carries our personal identity? Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/brast-003/?referrer=8257. https://closertotruth.com/video
/brast-003/?referrer=8257. Stephen Braude on Closer To Truth—9 CTT videos and 3
CTT TV episodes—.
Braude, Stephen, 2007b. Do Persons Have Souls? Closer to Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/brast-002/?referrer=7869.
Brin, David, 2003. Kiln People. Tor Science Fiction.
Brooks, Rodney, 2011. Can consciousness be non-biological? Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/broro-001/?referrer=7645.
Brophy, Thomas, Hameroff, Stuart, 2023. Neuroscience needs a revolution to understand
consciousness. https://myemail.constantcontact.com/Summer-Symposium—Neuros
cience-Needs-a-Revolution-to-Understand-Consciousness-.html?soid=11
38500257325&aid=yAVZ5a8qyEA.
Brown, Warren, 2014. Can consciousness be non-biological? Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/browa-002/?referrer=7645. https://closertotruth.com/contri
butor/warren-brown/. Brown, Warren. Closer To Truth—11 CTT videos and 3 CTT
TV episodes —.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
159
Brown, Warren, Maloney, H. Newton, Murphy, Nancy, 1998. Whatever Happened to the
Soul? Scientific and Theological Portraits of Human Nature. Fortress Press.
Buckner, R.L., 2013. The brain’s default network: origins and implications for the study
of psychosis. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 15 (3), 351–358. https://doi.org/10.31887/
DCNS.2013.15.3/rbuckner.
Buller, David, Hardcastle, Valarie, 2000. Evolutionary psychology, meet developmental
neurobiology: against promiscuous modularity. Brain Mind 1 (3), 307–325.
Bunge, Mario, 1977. Emergence and the mind. Neuroscience 2 (4), 501–509. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0306-4522(77)90047-1.
Bunge, Mario, 1989. From neuron to mind. News Physiol. Sci. 4, 206–209.
Bunge, Mario, 2011. Matter and Mind: A Philosophical Inquiry. Boston Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, 287. Springer.
Bunge, Mario, 2014. The Mind-Body Problem: A Psychobiological Approach, Including
Epilogue by Donald Hebb. Pergamon. Thanks to Mois´es ´Alvarez for suggesting Mario
Bunge.
Butlin, Patrick, et al.. Consciousness in artificial intelligence: insights from the science of
consciousness. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2308.08708.
Buzs´aki, Gy¨orgy, 2011. Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press.
Buzs´aki, Gy¨orgy, 2019. The Brain from inside Out. Oxford University Press.
Buzs´aki, Gy¨orgy, 2024. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 21
January 2024 06:33 UTC. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gy%C3%
B6rgy_Buzs%C3%A1ki&oldid=1197610056.
Buzs´aki, Gy¨orgy, Tingley, David, 2023. Cognition from the body-brain partnership:
exaptation of memory. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 46, 191–210. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-neuro-101222-110632.
Callaghan, Karmela Padavic, 2024. How entropy and equilibrium can help explain
consciousness. New Scientist. 21 February 2024. https://www.newscientist.com/a
rticle/mg26134791-700-how-entropy-and-equilibrium-can-help-explain-consci
ousness/.
Campbell, Thomas. 2003/2007.) My big toe: a Trilogy unifying philosophy, physics, and
metaphysics: awakening, discovery, inner workings. Lightning strike books. My big toe
(n.d.) website. https://www.my-big-toe.com.
Campbell, Robert, 2004. What does science say about the mind? - review of the problem
of the soul by owen flanagan. Navigator [now the new individualist]. June 2004. https
://www.atlassociety.org/post/what-does-science-say-about-the-mind-review-of-the-
problem-of-the-soul-by-owen-flanagan.
Carde˜na, E., 2018. The experimental evidence for parapsychological phenomena: a
review. Am. Psychol. 73 (5), 663–677. https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000236.
Cardenas-Garcia, Jaime, 2023. Infoautopoiesis and consciousness. J.Multiscale Neurosci.
2 (2), 326–340. https://doi.org/10.56280/1580236468.
Carhart-Harris, R.L., 2018. The entropic brain—revisited. Neuropharmacology 142,
167–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.03.010, 2018 Nov.
Carhart-Harris, R.L., Friston, K.J., 2019. REBUS and the anarchic brain: toward a unified
model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacol. Rev. 71, 316–344. https://doi.
org/10.1124/pr.118.017160. July 2019.
Carhart-Harris, Robin, et al., 2014. The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states
informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic drugs. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
8—2014 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020, 03 February 2014.
Carlo Rovelli, 2020. On what We Can Learn from the octopus Mind. BBC Science Focus.
https://www.sciencefocus.com/nature/carlo-rovelli-on-what-we-can-learn-from-th
e-octopus-mind.
Carr, Bernard, 2016a. What Exists (Part 1). Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/carbe-006/?referrer=7739. Bernard Carr on Closer To Truth—14 CTT
videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/bern
ard-carr/.
Carr, Bernard, 2016b. Physics of the Observer. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/carbe-004/?referrer=7713.
Carr, Bernard, 2016c. Physics of Consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/carbe-005/?referrer=7736.
Carr, Bernard, 2016d. Does ESP make sense? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/carbe-007/?referrer=8379.
Carroll, Sean, 2016. Physics of Consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/carse-023/?referrer=7736. Sean Carroll on Closer To Truth—27 CTT
videos and 8 CTT TV episodes—. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/sean
-carroll/.
Carroll, Sean, 2021. Consciousness and the laws of physics. J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (9–10).
Carruthers, Peter, 2000. Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge
University Press.
Carruthers, Peter, 2017. In defence of first-order representationalism. J. Conscious. Stud.
24, 5–6.
Carruthers, Peter, 2020. Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness. Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy.
The Center for Consciousness Studies, Australia, 2024. https://www.mindcausation.com.
Chalmers, David, 1995a. Absent qualia, fading qualia, dancing qualia. In:
Metzinger, Thomas (Ed.), Conscious Experience. Imprint Academic.
Chalmers, David, 1995b. Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 2
(No.3), 1995.
Chalmers, David, 1996. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford
University Press.
Chalmers, David, 2003. Consciousness and its place in nature. In: Stich, S., Warfield, T.
(Eds.), Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind. Blackwell.
Chalmers, David, 2007. Is consciousness fundamental? Closer To Truth. https://closerto
truth.com/video/chada-006/?referrer=8141. David Chalmers on Closer To
Truth—39 CTT videos and 16 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contribu
tor/david-chalmers/.
Chalmers, David, 2008. Strong and weak emergence. In: Clayton, Philip, Davies, Paul
(Eds.), The Re-emergence of Emergence. Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David, 2013. Panpsychism and panprotopsychism. The Amherst Lecture in
Philosophy 8. http://www.amherstlecture.org/chalmers2013/.
Chalmers, David, 2014a. Toward a science of consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/chada-014/?referrer=7752.
Chalmers, David, 2014b. What is Consciousness? (Part 1). Closer To Truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/chada-015/?referrer=7971.
Chalmers, David J., 2016a. Panpsychism and panprotopsychism. In: Brüntrup, G.,
Jaskolla, L. (Eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford University
Press.
Chalmers, David, 2016b. Toward a science of consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/chada-020/?referrer=7752.
Chalmers, David, 2016c. What is Panpsychism? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/chada-024/?referrer=8349.
Chalmers, David, 2018. The meta-problem of consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 25
(9–10).
Chalmers, David, 2020a. How can we solve the meta-problem of consciousness?
J. Conscious. Stud. 27 (5–6), 201–226.
Chalmers, David, 2020b. Is the hard problem of consciousness universal? J. Conscious.
Stud. 27 (5–6), 227–257.
Chalmers, David, 2020c. Debunking arguments for illusionism about consciousness.
J. Conscious. Stud. 27 (5–6), 258–281.
Chalmers, David, 2020d. Idealism and the mind-body problem. In: Seager, William (Ed.),
The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. Routledge.
Chalmers, David, 2023. X. September 18. https://twitter.com/davidchalmers42.
Chalmers, David, McQueen, Kelvin, 2022. Consciousness and the collapse of the wave
function in (Gao, Shan. In: Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics. Oxford
University Press.
Chalmers, David, Searle, John, 2014. Can Brain Alone Explain Consciousness (Chalmers
and Searle in 1999, 2007, 2014). Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/
can-brain-alone-explain-consciousness/?referrer=8630.
Chen, Christopher, 2020. Spooky Action Potentials at a Distance: Ephaptic Coupling.
Harv. Brain Sci. Initiative. https://brain.harvard.edu/hbi_news/spooky-action-
potentials-at-a-distance-ephaptic-coupling/.
Chiang, C.C., Shivacharan, R.S., et al., 2019. Slow periodic activity in the longitudinal
hippocampal slice can self-propagate non-synaptically by a mechanism consistent
with ephaptic coupling. J. Physiol. 597 (1), 249–269. https://doi.org/10.1113/
JP276904, 2019 Jan.
Chomsky, Noam, 1987. Language and Problems of Knowledge: the Managua Lectures.
The MIT Press.
Chomsky, Noam, 2020. New Horizons in the Study of Language and Mind. Cambridge
University Press.
Chomsky, Noam, 2022a. Noam Chomsky on the “Big Questions. Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/noam-chomsky-on-the-big-questions-part-4/.
Chomsky, Noam, 2022b. Mind Chat. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g2Vx5Ze_p8s.
Chopra, Deepak, 2013. What is Consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/chode-012/?referrer=7827. Deepak Chopra on Closer To Truth—32 CTT
videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/deepak-ch
opra/.
Chopra, Deepak, 2023a. Why does consciousness leave so many false clues? July 24,
2023. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/why-does-consciousness-leave-so-many-fal
se-clues-deepak/.
Chopra, Deepak, 2023b. Consciousness vs. the quantum field: exploring the nature of
reality. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/consciousness-vs-quantum-field-explori
ng-nature-chopra-md-official.
Chopra, Deepak, Kafatos, Menas, 2023. Why you aren’t conscious and never have been.
https://www.deepakchopra.com/articles/why-you-arent-conscious-and-never-ha
ve-been/.
Churchland, Paul, 1981. Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes.
J. Philos. 78.
Churchland, Patricia, 1986. Neurophilosophy: toward a Unified Science of the Mind/
Brain. The MIT Press.
Churchland, Patricia, 2000. What Are the Big Questions of Science? Closer To Truth. htt
ps://closertotruth.com/video/what-are-the-big-questions-of-science/?referrer
=8756. Churchland, Patricia on Closer To Truth–. https://closertotruth.com/contr
ibutor/patricia-s-churchland/.
Clark, Andy, 2010. Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension.
Oxford University Press.
Clark, Andy, 2017a. Busting out: predictive brains, embodied minds, and the puzzle of
the evidentiary veil. Noûs 51 (Issue), 4.
Clark, Andy, 2017b. What is the mind-body problem? https://closertotruth.com/video
/claan-001/?referrer=8201.
Clark, Andy, 2023. The Experience Machine: How Our Minds Predict and Shape Reality.
Pantheon.
Andy Clark on Closer To Truth—9 CTT videos and 1 CTT TV episodes—https://closertot
ruth.com/contributor/andy-clark/.
Clark, Andy, Chalmers, David, 1998. The Extended Mind. ANALYSIS 58: 1: 1998.
Clark, Andy, Friston, Karl, Wilkinson, Sam, 2019. Bayesing qualia consciousness as
inference, not raw datum. J. Conscious. Stud. 26 (9–10), 2019.
Clark, Thomas W., 1994. Death, nothingness, and subjectivity. https://www.naturalism.
org/philosophy/death/death-nothingness-and-subjectivity.
Clark, Thomas W., 2007. Encountering naturalism: a worldview and its uses. Center
Natural. https://naturalism.org/worldview-naturalism/encountering-naturalism-a-
worldview-and-its-uses.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
160
Clark, Thomas W., 2019. Locating consciousness: why experience can’t be objectified.
J. Conscious. Stud. 26 (11–12). https://naturalism.org/sites/naturalism.org/files/
Locating%20Consciousness_0.pdf.
Clark, Thomas W., 2024. Personal Communication. Clark, Thomas W., Worldview
Naturalism. https://www.naturalism.org.
Clayton, Philip, Davies, Paul, 2008. The Re-emergence of Emergence: the Emergentist
Hypothesis from Science to Religion. Oxford University Press.
Cleeremans, Axel, Tallon-Baudry, Catherine, 2022. Consciousness matters: phenomenal
experience has functional value. Neurosci. Conscious 2022 (1), niac007. https://doi.
org/10.1093/nc/niac007.
Closer To Truth website—https://closertotruth.com/.
Closer To Truth YouTube Channel—https://www.youtube.com/@CloserToTruthTV.
Cognitive-Theoretic Model of the Universe (CTMU). (n.d.). Beginner’s introduction.
CTMU Wiki. https://ctmucommunity.org/wiki/Beginner%27s_introduction.
Combs, Allan, 2022. States of consciousness and self-organization. In: Schuldberg, D.,
Richards, R., Guisinger, S. (Eds.), Chaos and Nonlinear Psychology: Keys to
Creativity in Mind and Nature. Oxford University Press. Thanks to Alex Gomez-
Marin who suggested Combs, pp. 316–339.
Complex adaptive system, 2023. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision,
19 December 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Complex_adaptive
_system&oldid=1190785624.
Consciousness, 2023. Theosophy Wiki. Date of last revision: 25 November 2023. https
://theosophy.wiki/en/Consciousness.
Consciousness, Absolute. (n.d.) Theosophy World. https://theosophy.world/encyclo
pedia/consciousness-absolute.
Cornelissen, Matthijs, 2004. Sri Aurobindo’s Evolutionary Ontology of Consciousness.
Indian Psychology Institute. https://www.ipi.org.in/texts/matthijs/mc-conscious
ness-mit.php.
Craig, William Lane, 2015. #427 Questions about Body-Soul Interaction Reasonable
Faith. June 21, 2015. https://www.reasonablefaith.org/question-answer/P6
0/questions-about-body-soul-interaction.
Craig, William Lane, 2023. #835 Why Does My Soul Act on My Particular Body?
Reasonable Faith. May 14, 2023. https://www.reasonablefaith.org/writings/ques
tion-answer/why-does-my-soul-act-on-my-particular-body.
Crick, Francis, Koch, Christof, 1990. Towards a neurobiological theory of consciousness.
Semin. Neurosci. 2.
Crick, Francis, Koch, Christof, 2005. What is the function of the claustrum? Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360 (1458), 1271–1279. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2005.1661, 2005 Jun 29.
Damasio, Antonio, 1999. The Feeling of what Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making
of Consciousness. Harcourt.
Damasio, Antonio, 2019. How are brains conscious? Closer To Truth -. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/daman-006/?referrer=7857. Antonio Damasio on Closer To Truth—9
CTT videos and 5 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/antonio
-damasio/.
Damasio, Antonio, 2021. Feeling & Knowing: Making Minds Conscious. Pantheon.
Damasio, Antonio, Damasio, Hanna, 2021. Preface to the special issue ‘sentience and
consciousness’. J. Conscious. Stud. 28, 7–8.
Damasio, Antonio, Damasio, Hanna, 2023. Feelings are the source of consciousness.
Neural Comput. 35, 277–286. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01521, 2023.
Damasio, Antonio, Damasio, Hanna, 2024. Homeostatic feelings and the emergence of
consciousness. J. Cognit. Neurosci., forthcoming.
Davidson, Donald, 1993. Thinking causes. In: Heil, John, Mele, Alfred (Eds.), Mental
Causation. Clarendon Press.
Davies, Paul, 2006a. Why the Cosmos? (Part 1). Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/davpa-006/?referrer=8227. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/pau
l-davies/. Paul Davies’s 62 CTT videos and 26 CTT TV episodes on Closer To Truth.
Davies, Paul, 2006b. Is consciousness fundamental? Closer To Truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/davpa-013/?referrer=8141.
Davies, Paul, 2006c. Must the universe contain consciousness? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/davpa-015/?referrer=8143.
Davies, Paul, 2008. Preface. In: Clayton, Philip, Davies, Paul (Eds.), The Re-emergence of
Emergence: the Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion. Oxford University
Press, 2008.
Davis, Andrew, 2020. Mind, Value, and Cosmos: on the Relational Nature of Ultimacy
(Lexington).
Davis, Andrew, 2022. Process theology. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/
video/andrew-davis-on-process-theology/.
Deacon, Terrence, 1998. The Symbolic Species: the Co-evolution of Language and the
Brain. W. W. Norton & Company.
Deacon, Terrence, 2011a. Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter. W.W.
Norton & Company.
Deacon, Terrence, 2011b. Consciousness is a matter of constraint. New Sci. (Accessed 30
November 2011).
Deacon, Terrence, 2024. Personal Communication.
Dehaene, Stanislas, Naccache, Lionel, 2000. Towards a cognitive neuroscience of
consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79, 1–37.
Dehaene, S., Lau, H., Kouider, S., 2017. What is consciousness, and could machines have
it? Science 358 (6362), 486–492, 2017 Oct 27.
Delio, Ilia, 2020. Re-Enchanting the Earth: Why AI Needs Religion. Orbis.
Delio, Ilia, 2021. The Hours of the Universe. Orbis.
Delio, Ilia, 2023. The Not-Yet God. Orbis.
Dembski, William, 2021. How informational realism subverts materialism. Mind Matter.
https://mindmatters.ai/2021/07/how-informational-realism-subverts-materialism/.
(Accessed 26 July 2021).
Dembski, William, 2023. How informational realism dissolves the mind–body problem.
In: Menuge, et al. (Eds.), Minding the Brain: Models of the Mind, Information, and
Empirical Science. Discovery Institute.
Dennett, Daniel C., 1992. Consciousness Explained. Back Bay Books.
Dennett, Daniel, 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life.
Simon & Schuster.
Dennett, Daniel, 2007. How does philosophy illuminate the physical world? Closer to
truth. Daniel Dennett on Closer To Truth—23 CTT videos and 12 CTT TV series—.
https://closertotruth.com/contributor/daniel-dennett/.
Dennett, Daniel, 2017. From Bacteria to Bach and Back: the Evolution of Minds. W. W.
Norton & Company.
Dennett, Daniel, 2019. Welcome to strong illusionism. J. Conscious. Stud. 26 (9–10),
2019.
Dennett, Daniel, 2023a. I’ve Been Thinking. W. W. Norton & Company.
Dennett, Daniel, 2023b. The mysteries of the mind. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth
.com/video/daniel-dennett-on-the-mysteries-of-the-mind/.
Division of Perceptual Studies (DOPS). (n.d.) University of Virginia School of
Medicine—https://med.virginia.edu/perceptual-studies/.
Dobzhansky, T., 1973. Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.
Am. Biol. Teacher. 35 (3), 125–129. https://doi.org/10.2307/4444260.
Dorato, M., 2016. Rovelli’s relational quantum mechanics, monism and quantum
becoming. In: Marmodpro, A., Yates, A. (Eds.), The Metaphysics of Relations. Oxford
University Press.
Double-aspect theory, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 30
June 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double-aspect_theory&oldi
d=1162634219.
Doyle, Bob (n.d.a.) David Chalmers. The Information Philosopher. https://www.info
rmationphilosopher.com/solutions/philosophers/chalmers/. Retrieved: 15 March
2024.
Doyle, Bob (n.d.b.) The Experience Recorder and Reproducer. The Information
Philosopher. https://www.informationphilosopher.com/knowledge/ERR/.
Retrieved: 15 March 2024.
Dretske, Fred, 1997. Naturalizing the Mind. The MIT Press.
Dretske, Fred, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 30 August
2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fred_Dretske&oldid=11
72923288.
Dreyfus, Hubert, 2009. Is consciousness entirely physical? Closer to truth -. https://closer
totruth.com/video/drehu-010/?referrer=7957. Hubert Dreyfus on Closer To
Truth—10 CTT videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contr
ibutor/hubert-dreyfus/.
Duan, Simon (n.d.) Metacomputics Labs. https://metacomputics.com/about.
Duan, Yucong, Gong, Shiming, 2024a. Understanding the essence of "BUG" in
consciousness: a journey into the abstraction of semantic wholeness. World Artific.
Conscious. Conf.Popular Sci. Ser. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.29978.62409.
Duan, Yucong, Gong, Shiming, 2024b. Consciousness, mathematics, and natural laws: in-
depth exploration from Yucong Duan’s BUG theory. World Artificial Consciousness
Conference Popular Science Series. https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.20085.96484.
Durig, Alexander, 2023. Closer to Consciousness: the First Strong Theory of
Consciousness. AuthorHouse.
D’Ariano, G.M., Faggin, Federico, 2022. Hard problem and free will: an information-
theoretical approach. In: Artificial Intelligence versus Natural Intelligence. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, pp. 145–192.
Eagleman, David (n.d.) What is Consciousness? David Eagleman website. https://eagl
eman.com/podcast/what-is-consciousness/.
Eagleman, David, 2010. Beyond God and atheism: why I am a ’possibilian’. New Sci. htt
ps://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20727795-300-beyond-god-and-atheism-wh
y-i-am-a-possibilian/.
Eagleman, David, 2011a. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/
video/eagda-006/?referrer=797. David Eagleman on Closer To Truth—4 TV episodes
and 6 web videos. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/david-eagleman/.
Eagleman, David, 2011b. Is brain and mind the same thing? Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/eagda-001/?referrer=8492.
Edelman, G.M., 1987. Neural Darwinism: the Theory of Neuronal Group Selection. Basic
Books.
Edelman, G.M., 1989. The Remembered Present. Basic Books, New York, NY.
Edelman, Gerald, 2003. Naturalizing consciousness: a theoretical framework. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100 (9), 5520–5524. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0931349100.
Edelman, Gerald, Tononi, Giulio, 2000. A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter
Becomes Imagination. Basic Books.
Edelman, Gerald, 2024. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 1
december 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title-Gerald_Edleman&oldid
-1198305896.
Edelman, Gerald, Garlly, Joseph, Baars, Bernard, 2011. Biology of consciousness. Front.
Psychol. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00004, 25 January 2011. Sec.
Consciousness Research volume 2 - 2011.
Edlow, B., et al., 2024. Multimodal MRI reveals brainstem connections that sustain
wakefulness in human consciousness. Sci. Transl. Med. 16, eadj4303 https://doi.
org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adj4303.
Edwards, Jo, 2024. Review of Plato’s prisoners by Silvia Paddock and Thomas J.
Buervenich. J. Conscious. Stud. 31 (1–2), 235–241.
Ellis, George F.R., 2006. What are the ultimate questions of all reality? Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/ellge-002/?referrer=8233. George Ellis on Closer
To Truth—18 CTT videos and 7 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contri
butor/george-ellis/.
Ellis, George F.R., 2015. Possibility spaces: their nature and implications for cosmology
and theology. In: Newsome, Ryan Andrew, Kellenberg, Brad J. (Eds.), Practicing to
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
161
Aim at Truth: Theological Engagements in Honor of Nancey Murphy (Cascade
Books).
Ellis, George F.R., 2017a. What exists? (Part 3). Closer to truth. closertotruth.com/video/
ellge-007/?referrer=7599. George Ellis on Closer To Truth—18 CTT videos and 7
CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/george-ellis/.
Ellis, George F.R., 2017b. What is strong emergence? Closer To Truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/ellge-009/?referrer=7561.
Ellis, George F.R., 2019. Why reductionism does not work. Essay for the Kurt G¨odel Prize.
https://kurtgoedel.de/cms-83FO/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/Why_reduct
ionism_does_not_work-1-28.pdf.
Ellis, George F.R., 2023. Efficient, formal, material, and final causes in biology and
technology. Entropy 25 (9), 1301. https://doi.org/10.3390/e25091301.
Enactivism, 2024. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of Last Revision. https://en.wiki
pedia.org/w/index.php?title=Enactivism&oldid=1172539598. (Accessed 1
February 2024).
Explorations in Consciousness: Death, Psychedelics, and Mystical Experience, 2023. New
York Academy of Sciences Conference. https://events.nyas.org/event/7d309c25
-5b4d-4ae7-af68-59ace2817707/summary.
Faber, Roland, 2023. The Mind of Whitehead: Adventure in Ideas. Pickwick.
Faggin, Federico, 2023. Possibilities are quantum. Possibil. Stud. Soc. 1 (Issue 1–2).
Farris, Joshua, 2023. The creation of self: a case for the soul. LFF Books.
Farris, Joshua, 2024. Optimistic reports on god and the soul. Worldview Bullet. Jan. 14,
2024 https://worldviewbulletin.substack.com/p/optimistic-reports-on-god-and-the?
utm.
Feser, Edward, 2010. Chomsky on the mind-body problem. https://edwardfeser.blogspo
t.com/2010/06/chomsky-on-mind-body-problem.html.
Feser, Edward, 2012a. Think, McFly, think. https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2012
/08/think-mcfly-think.html.
Feser, Edward, 2012b. Animals are conscious! In other news, sky is blue, water wet.
https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/2012/08/animals-are-conscious-in-other-news-s
ky.html.
Feser, Edward, 2012c. Aristotle, call your office. First Things. https://www.firstthings.co
m/web-exclusives/2012/10/aristotle-call-your-office.
Feser, Edward, 2022a. Problems for Goff’s panpsychism. https://edwardfeser.blogspot.
com/2022/07/problems-for-goffs-panpsychism.html.
Feser, Edward, 2022b. Chomsky on consciousness. https://edwardfeser.blogspot.com/
2022/09/chomsky-on-consciousness.html.
Fineberg, Todd, Mallatt, Jon, 2016. The Ancient Origins of Consciousness: How the Brain
Created Experience. In: I Learned about Fineberg and Mallatt via Paul Thagard, vol.
2021. The MIT Press.
Fingelkurts, Andrew, et al., 2019. Brain-mind operational architectonics: At the
boundary between quantum physics and Eastern metaphysics. Phy. Life Rev. 31,
122–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plrev.2018.11.001.
Fingelkurts, Andrew, et al., 2020. Selfhood triumvirate: From phenomenology to brain
activity and back again. Conscious. Cognit. 86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.20
20.103031.
Fingelkurts, Andrew, 2024. Personal communication.
Fisher, Matthew, 2015. Quantum cognition: the possibility of processing with nuclear
spins in the brain. November 2015 Ann. Phys. 362, 593–602. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aop.2015.08.020.
Flanagan, Owen, 1991. The Science of the Mind. The MIT Press.
Flanagan, Owen, 1993. Consciousness Reconsidered. Bradford Books.
Flanagan, Owen, 2003. The Problem of the Soul. Basic Books.
Flanagan, Owen, 2007. The Really Hard Problem: Meaning in a Material World. The MIT
Press.
Flanagan, Owen, 2009. Review: where in the world is the mind? New Scientist. 14
January 2009. https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20126911-800-re
view-where-in-the-world-is-the-mind/.
Flanagan, Owen, Caruso, Gregg D., 2018. Neuroexistentialism: third-wave existentialism.
In: Caruso, Gregg, Owen, Flanagan (Eds.), Neuroexistentialism: Meaning, Morals,
and Purpose in the Age of Neuroscience. Oxford Academic, 15 Feb. 2018.
Fleming, S.M., et al., 2023. The Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness as
Pseudoscience. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/zsr78.
Fodor, Jerry, 1989. Psychosemantics: the Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind.
Bradford Books.
Fodor, Jerry, 1992. The big idea: can there be a science of mind? Times Lit. Suppl.
(Accessed 3 July 1992).
Fodor, Jerry, 1998. In Critical Condition: Polemical Essays on Cognitive Science and the
Philosophy of Mind. The MIT Press, p. 83.
Fodor, Jerry, 2007. Headaches have themselves. In: London Review of Books, vol. 29,
10—24 May 2007. Review of Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism
Entail Panpsychism? by Galen Strawson et al. Imprint Academic. October 2006.
Forrest, Matthew H., 2021. The meaning of life: when the black dog is barking up the
right tree. ITZA Glob. Books.
Frank, Adam, Gleiser, Marcello, Thompson, Evan, 2024. The Blind Spot: Why Science
Cannot Ignore Human Experience.
Franken, Dirk (n.d.) Transparency and the Structure of Consciousness. https://www.
academia.edu/35589395/Transparency_and_the_Structure_of_Consciousness.
Frankish, Keith, 2019. The meta-problem is the problem of consciousness. J. Conscious.
Stud. 26 (9–10), 2019.
Frankish, Keith, 2022. Author’s preprint forthcoming in a special issue of Kl¯esis Revue
Philosophique. https://www.re-vue-klesis.org/. Version of 11/12/22.
Franklin, Michael S., Baumgart, Stephen L., Schooler, Jonathan W., 2014. Future
directions in precognition research: more research can bridge the gap between
skeptics and proponents. Front. Psychol. 5—2014 https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.00907.
Freeman, David, 2023. What near-death and psychedelic experiences reveal about
human consciousness. The New York Acad. Sci. June 28, 2023 https://www.nyas.
org/news-articles/academy-news/what-near-death-and-psychedelic-experiences-re
veal-about-human-consciousness/.
Friston, Karl, 2005. A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
360 (1456), 2005 Apr 29.
Friston, Karl, 2017. The Mathematics of Mind-Time. Aeon. In: https://aeon.co/essays
/consciousness-is-not-a-thing-but-a-process-of-inference.
Friston, Karl, FitzGerald, Thomas, et al., 2017. Active interference: a process theory.
Neural Comput. 29.
Friston, Karl, Wiese, Wanja, Hobson, J. Allan, 2020. Sentience and the origins of
consciousness: from cartesian duality to markovian monism. Entropy 22, 516.
https://doi.org/10.3390/e22050516, 2020.
Frith, Chris D., Haggard, Patrick, 2018. Volition and the brain - revisiting a classic
experimental study. Trends Neurosci. 41 (7), 405–407, 2018 Jul.
Frith, Chris, Metzinger, Thomas, 2016. What’s the use of consciousness? How the stab of
conscience made us really conscious. The Pragmatic Turn: toward Action-Oriented
Views in Cognitive Science. In: Engel, A.K., Friston, K.J., Kragic, D. (Eds.),
Strüngmann Forum Reports, vol. 18. J. Lupp, series editor. The MIT Press.
Fr¨ohlich, Flavio, McCormick, David, 2010. Endogenous electric fields may guide
neocortical network activity. Neuron 67 (1). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2010.06.005.
Garfield, Jay, 1996. Casting out demons and exorcising zombies: exposing NeoCartesian
myths in frank Jackson’s philosophy of mind. In: Dowe, P., Nicholls, M., Shotton, L.
(Eds.), Australian Philosophers. Hobart. Pyrrho Press.
Garfield, Jay L., 2015. Engaging Buddhism. Oxford University Press, Kindle Edition,
pp. 135–136.
Garfield, Jay, 2016. Illusionism and givenness. J. Conscious. Stud. 23 (11–12).
Garfield, Jay, 2022. Losing Ourselves: Learning to Live without a Self. Princeton
University Press.
Gefter, Amanda, 2015. A private view of quantum reality. Quanta Magazine. https:
//www.quantamagazine.org/quantum-bayesianism-explained-by-its-founder-
20150604/.
Gennaro, Rocco (n.d.) Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness. Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. https://iep.utm.edu/higher-order-theories-of-consciousness/.
Retrieved: 15 March 2024.
Germine, Mark, 2018. The holographic principle of mind and the evolution of
consciousness. J.Conscious Evolut.: Iss. 3, 1. https://digitalcommons.ciis.edu/cejo
urnal/vol3/iss3/1.
Gholipour, Bahar, 2019. A famous argument against free will has been debunked.
Atlantic. (Accessed 10 September 2019).
Gibson, James J., 2014. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Routledge.
Gibson, James J., 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 14 January
2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_J._Gibson&oldid=11
95695573.
Ginsburg, Simona, Jablonka, Eva, 2019. The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul - Learning
and the Origins of Consciousness. The MIT Press.
Ginsburg, Simona, Jablonka, Eva, 2022. Picturing the Mind - Consciousness through the
Lens of Evolution. The MIT Press.
Globus, Gordon, 2003. Quantum Closures and Disclosures: Thinking-Together
Postphenomenology and Quantum Brain Dynamics. John Benjamins Publishing
Company. Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin who suggested Globus.
Globus, Gordon, 2011. Consciousness and quantum physics: a deconstruction of the
topic. J. Cosmol. 14.
Globus, Gordon, 2012. Consciousness and the Brain: a Scientific and Philosophical
Inquiry. Springer Science & Business Media.
Globus, Gordon, 2013. Consciousness vs. Disclosure A deconstruction of consciousness
studies. J. Conscious. Stud. 20 (1–2), 1–2.
Globus, Gordon, 2022. Doubts about the world out there: a monadological redux.
J. Neurophilosop. 1 (2).
Godfrey-Smith, Peter, 2016. Other Minds: the Octopus, the Sea, and the Deep Origins of
Consciousness. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Goff, Philip, 2019a. Did the universe design itself? Int. J. Philos. Relig. 85.
Goff, Philip, 2019b. Galileo’s Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness.
Pantheon.
Goff, Philip, 2020. Debate with Bernardo Kastrup. https://conscienceandconsciousness.
com/2020/07/08/response-to-bernardo-kastrup/.
Goff, Philip, 2021. Putting consciousness first: replies to critics. J. Conscious. Stud. 28
(9–10).
Goff, Philip, 2023. Why? the Purpose of the Universe. Oxford University Press.
Goff, P., 2024. How exactly does panpsychism explain consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud.
31 (3–4), 56–82. https://doi.org/10.53765/20512201.31.3.056.
Goff, Philip, Seager, William, Allen-Hermanson, Sean, 2022. "Panpsychism", the stanford
Encyclopedia of philosophy (summer 2022 edition). In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.). https
://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2022/entries/panpsychism/.
Goldstein, Rebecca Newberger, 2011a. Why a Mind-Body Problem? Closer to Truth.
Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/golre-010/?referrer=8203.
Rebecca Newberger Goldstein on Closer To Truth—24 CTT videos and 7 CTT TV
episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/rebecca-newberger-goldstein/.
Goldstein, Rebecca Newberger, 2011b. Is consciousness irreducible? Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/golre-006/?referrer=7845.
Goldstein, Rebecca Newberger, 2014. Language and consciousness. Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/golre-015/?referrer=8015.
Gomatam, R., 1987. Real and Artificial Intelligence: toward a Hierarchical Model of
Consciousness, Intelligence, Mind and the Body Bhaktivedanta Institute (Mumbai).
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
162
Gomatam, Ravi, 2021. Personal communication. Gomatam, Ravi (2021.) Hindu
philosophy. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/ravi-gomatam-on-hi
ndu-philosophy/.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2021. If the brain is the answer, what was the question? Review of
Buzs´aki, Gy¨orgy. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Curr. Biol. 31, R221–R223.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2022. Materialists’ best guess? Review of Anil seth’s "being you".
J. Conscious. Stud. 29 (5–6), 201–207.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2023. The consciousness of neuroscience. eNeuro.0434-23.2023 10
(11), 1–6. November 2023. https://www.eneuro.org/content/10/11/ENEURO.043
4-23.2023.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2023a. David Bohm’s unfinished revolution. Science 381 (6657). htt
ps://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adi3423.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2023b. At the edges of consciousness: science and anomalous
experiences. Pari Center. https://paricenter.com/journals/return-of-the-sacred/.
Gomez-Marin, Alex, 2024. Experiencing science. Science 383 (6686), 1 MARCH 2024.
https://behavioroforganismsdotorg.files.wordpress.com/2024/03/gomezmarin-blin
dspot.pdf.
Gomez-Marin, Arnau, Juan, 2019. The false problem of consciousness. Pre-print.
https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/16804/.
Goswami, Amit, 1993. The Self-Aware Universe. Tarcher/Putnam.
Goyal, Madhav, Singh, Sonal, et al., 2014. Meditation programs for psychological stress
and well-being - a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern. Med. 174 (3)
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13018.
Graboi, Daniel G., 2023. A three-aspect model for consciousness. J. Sci. Explor. 37 (3)
https://doi.org/10.31275/20232873.
Graziano, Michael, 2014. Can consciousness be non-biological? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/grami-001/?referrer=7645. Michael Graziano on
Closer To Truth—9 CTT videos—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/michael-
graziano/.
Graziano, Michael, 2019a. True nature of consciousness: solving the biggest mystery of
your mind. New Sci. 18 September 2019—https://www.newscientist.com/article
/mg24332480-000-true-nature-of-consciousness-solving-the-biggest-mystery-of-yo
ur-mind/.
Graziano, Michael, 2019b. Rethinking Consciousness: A Scientific Theory of Subjective
Experience. W. W. Norton & Company.
Graziano, Michael, 2019c. We are machines that claim to Be conscious. J. Conscious.
Stud. 26, 9–10.
Greenfield, Susan, 2012. Is consciousness irreducible? Closer To Truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/gresu-008/?referrer=7845. Susan Greenfield on Closer To Truth—9
CTT videos and 4 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/susan-gr
eenfield/.
Gregory, Richard, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 20 may
2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Gregory&oldid=11
55870372 (Thanks to Uziel Awret for suggesting Richard Gregory).
Greyson, B., Kelly, E.W., Kelly, E.F., 2009. Explanatory models for near-death
experiences. In: Holden, J.M., Greyson, B., James, D. (Eds.), The Handbook of Near-
Death Experiences. Praeger/ABC-CLIO, pp. 213–234.
Griffin, David Ray, 1997. Panexperientialist physicalism and the mind-body problem.
J. Conscious. Stud. 4 (3), 1997.
Grinberg-Zylberbaum, Jacobo, 1981. The transformation of neuronal activity into
conscious experience: the syntergic theory. J. Soc. Biol. Struct. 4, 201–210, 1981.
Grinberg-Zylberbaum, J., 1982. Psychophysiological Correlates of Communication,
Gravitation and Unity—The Syntergic Theory. D Gordon and Breach Science
Publishers, Inc.
Grinberg-Zylberbaum, Jacobo, 1997. Ideas about a new psychophysiology of
consciousness: the syntergic theory. Autumn 1997 J. Mind Behav. 18 (4), 443–458
(Grinberg is suggested by Alex Gomez-Marin who is an expert on his work.).
Grinberg-Zylberbaum, J., et al., 1994. The einstein-podolsky-rosen paradox in the brain:
the transferred potential. Phys. Essays 7 number 4, 1994.
Grossberg, Stephen, 2013. Adaptive Resonance Theory: how a brain learns to consciously
attend, learn, and recognize a changing world. Neural Network. 2013 Jan;37.
Grossberg, Stephen, 2017. Towards solving the hard problem of consciousness: the
varieties of brain resonances and the conscious experiences that they support.
Keynote Lecture at the 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks.
Anchorage. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_hBye6JQCh4.
Grossberg, Stephen, 2019. The resonant brain: how attentive conscious seeing regulates
action sequences that interact with attentive cognitive learning, recognition, and
prediction. Atten. Percept. Psychophys. 81, 2237–2264. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13414-019-01789-2.
Grossberg, Stephen, 2021. Conscious Mind, Resonant Brain: How Each Brain Makes a
Mind. Oxford University Press. Personal communication.
Grossberg, Stephen, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 10 may
2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Grossberg.
Guyer, Paul, Horstmann, Rolf-Peter, 2023. "Idealism", the stanford Encyclopedia of
philosophy (spring 2023 edition). In: Zalta, Edward N., Nodelman, Uri (Eds.). https://
plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2023/entries/idealism/.
Hameroff, Stuart, 2014a. Conscious., Microtub. ‘Orch OR’. J. Conscious. Stud. 21 (3–4).
Hameroff, Stuart, 2014b. Quantum physics of consciousness. Closer to truth.
closertotruth.com/video/hamst-017/?referrer=7937. Can Consciousness be Non-
Biological? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/hamst-012/?referrer
=8531. Stuart Hameroff on Closer To Truth—18 CTT videos and 2 CTT TV
episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/stuart-hameroff/.
Hameroff, Stuart, et al., 2024. Consciousness came before life. IAI News. /articles/life-an
d-consciousness-what-are-they-auid-2836.
Hardcastle, Valarie Gray, 1995. Locating Consciousness. John Benjamins Publishing
Company.
Hardcastle, Valarie Gray, 1996. The why of consciousness: a non-issue for materialists.
J. Conscious. Stud. 3 (No.1), 7–13, 1996.
Hardcastle, Valarie, 1998. On the matter of minds and mental causation. Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 58 (1), 1–25.
Hardcastle, Valarie Gray, 2020. The consciousness of embodied cognition, affordances,
and the brain. Topoi 39, 23–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-017-9503-7.
Hardcastle, Valarie, Raja, Vicente, 1998. The neural correlates of consciousness. In:
Gennaro, Rocco (Ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Consciousness. Routledge,
pp. 235–247.
Harman, G., 1990. ‘The intrinsic quality of experience’, in tomberlin; reprinted in lycan
& Prinz. (2008. Mind and Cognition, third ed. Basil Blackwell.
Harp, Dennis, 2022. Lumignosis. https://lumignosis.org.
Harrell, Stevan, 1979. The concept of soul in Chinese folk religion. J. Asian Stud. https://
www.jstor.org/stable/2053785.
Harris, Lydon, 1998. Divine action: an interview with John Polkinghorne. Cross Current
48 (Issue 1). Spring 1998.
Harris, Sam, 2011. The mystery of consciousness. Part I, October 11, 2011; Part II,
October 19, 2011. https://www.samharris.org/blog/the-mystery-of-consciousness.
Harris, Annaka, 2019. Conscious: A Brief Guide to the Fundamental Mystery of the Mind.
Harper.
Harris, Annaka, 2020. Consciousness Isn’t Self-Centered: Think of Consciousness like
Spacetime—A Fundamental Field That’s Everywhere. Nautilus. https://nautil.us/c
onsciousness-isnt-self_centered-237720/. (Accessed 26 February 2020).
Harris, Annaka, 2022. Consciousness may not require a brain. Instit. Art Ideas. https://iai
.tv/articles/consciousness-may-not-require-a-brain-auid-2330?_auid=2020.
Hart, David Bentley, 2019a. Does consciousness defeat materialism (Part 2). Closer to
truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/harda-007/?referrer=7662. David Bentley
Hart on Closer To Truth—13 CTT videos and 4 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotr
uth.com/contributor/david-bentley-hart/.
Hart, David Bentley, 2019b. What is human mind in a theistic world? Closer to truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/harda-008/?referrer=7683.
Hart, David Bentley, 2021a. Science, consciousness, information: spiritual science and
the science of mind, Part One. https://davidbentleyhart.substack.com/p/science-con
sciousness-information.
Hart, David Bentley, 2021b. Nature, cause, mind - spiritual science and the science of
mind, Part Three. https://davidbentleyhart.substack.com/p/nature-cause-mind.
Hart, David Bentley, 2022a. Reflections on life and mind, Part Two reduction,
emergence, form. Leaves in the wind. https://davidbentleyhart.substack.com/p/refl
ections-on-life-and-mind-part.
Hart, David Bentley, 2022b. Mind, being, god - spiritual science and the science of mind,
Part Four. Leaves in the wind. https://davidbentleyhart.substack.com/p/mind-be
ing-god.
Hart, David Bentley, 2022c. On monism and becoming uncreated in Hart’s you are gods.
Jesus and the ancient paths. https://jesusandtheancientpaths.com/2022/12/23/on-
monism-and-becoming-uncreated-in-harts-you-are-gods/.
Hart, David Bentley, 2022d. Plan for a book on the science of mind. https://churchlife
journal.nd.edu/articles/plan-for-a-book-on-the-science-of-mind/.
Hart, David Bentley, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 1
February 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Bentley_Hart.
Hartford, Andrew, 2014. Personal communication. The EP conjecture. https://www.
hartfordlab.com/uploads/2/0/5/0/20500914/the_ep_conjecture_argument_by_adh.
pdf.
Hartshorne, C., Reese, W.L. (Eds.), 2000. Philosophers Speak of God. Humanity Books
(Original work published 1953.).
Haun, A., Tononi, G., 2019. Why does space feel the way it does? Towards a principled
account of spatial experience. Entropy 21 (12), 1160.
Hawkins, David R. Veritas Publishing. (n.d.) https://veritaspub.com/dr-h
awkins/#Biography%20Summary.
Hawkins, David R., 2014. Power vs. Force: the hidden determinants of human behavior.
Hay House.
Heisenberg, Werner, 1958. Physics and Philosophy: the Revolution in Modern Science.
Harper Torchbooks.
Herzog, R., Mediano, P.A.M., et al., 2023. A whole-brain model of the neural entropy
increase elicited by psychedelic drugs. Sci. Rep. 13, 6244. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-023-32649-7, 2023.
Higher-order theories of consciousness, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of
last revision: 30 july 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_theories
_of_consciousness.
Hiley, Basil, Pylkk¨anen, Paavo, 2022. Can quantum mechanics solve the hard problem of
consciousness? In: Gao, Shan (Ed.), Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics. Oxford
University Press.
Hiller, Jack H., 2019. Near Death Experience of Space, Time, and Consciousness: How
the World Was Created and Functions.
Hiller, Jack H., 2020. Space, time, and consciousness. J. Conscious. Explorat. Res. 10 (7),
98, 2020.
Hiller, Jack H., 2021. Evidence of the body possessing a form of consciousness beyond its
soul. Sci. GOD J. 12 (3), 213–217. November 2021.
Hirstein, William, 2012. Mindmelding: Consciousness, Neuroscience, and the Mind’s
Privacy. Oxford University Press.
Hirstein, William, 2024. Personal Communication.
Hoffman, Donald, 2008. Conscious realism and the mind-body problem. Mind Matter 6
(1).
Hoffman, Donald, 2013. What is Consciousness? (Part 1). Closer To Truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/hofdo-010/?referrer=7971. Donald Hoffman on Closer To
Truth—12 CTT videos and 2 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contribu
tor/donald-hoffman/.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
163
Hoffman, Donald, 2019a. The Case against Reality: How Evolution Hid the Truth from
Our Eyes. Penguin.
Hoffman, Donald, 2019b. Imitation and extinction: the case against reality. Los Angeles
Rev. Books Quart. J.: Imitation (23). (Accessed 18 August 2019).
Holographic principle, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 4
january 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holographic_principle.
Holonomic brain theory, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 25
December 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holonomic_brain_theory.
Horgan, J., 2016. World’s Smartest Physicist Thinks Science Can’t Crack Consciousness.
Scientific American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/blog/cross-check/world-s
-smartest-physicist-thinks-science-can-t-crack-consciousness/.
Horgan, John, 2018. Mind–body problems: my meta-solution to the mystery of who We
really are. Sci. Am. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/cross-check/mind-body-
problems-my-meta-solution-to-the-mystery-of-who-we-really-are/.
Horgan, John, 2019. Mind-body problems: science, subjectivity & who We really are.
Independently published. https://www.amazon.com/Mind-Body-Problems-Scienc
e-Subjectivity-Really/dp/1731440480.
Horgan, John, 2023. A 25-year-old bet about consciousness has finally been settled. Sci.
Am. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-25-year-old-bet-about-consci
ousness-has-finally-been-settled/.
Huang, Wenge (n.d.) From “Non-self” to “Emptiness”: neither Subject nor Object of
“Awareness”. https://www.academia.edu/76276488/From_Non_self_to_Emptiness_
neither_Subject_nor_Object_of_Awareness_. Huang, Wenge. The Five Aggregates and
“Awareness of Awareness”: an Original Interpretation of "Non-self". https://www.
academia.edu/74504302/The_Five_Aggregates_and_Awareness_of_Awareness_an_Ori
ginal_Interpretation_of_Non_self.
Humphrey, Nicholas, 2019. Easy does it—a soft landing for consciousness. J. Conscious.
Stud. 26 (No), 9–10.
Humphrey, Nicholas, 2022. Seeing and somethingness. Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays
/how-blindsight-answers-the-hard-problem-of-consciousness. (Accessed 2 October
2022).
Humphrey, Nicholas, 2023a. The invention of consciousness. Closer To Truth
closertotruth.com/video/nicholas-humphrey-on-the-invention-of-consciousness/.
Nicholas Humphrey on Closer To Truth—13 CTT videos and 5 CTT TV episodes. htt
ps://closertotruth.com/contributor/nicholas-humphrey/.
Humphrey, Nicholas, 2023b. Sentience: the Invention of Consciousness. The MIT Press.
Humphrey, Nicholas, 2024. Personal Communication.
Hunt, Tan, Schooler, Jonathan, 2019. The easy part of the hard problem: a resonance
theory of consciousness. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 13 https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2019.00378, 2019.
Hut, Piet, Shepard, Roger, 1996. Turning the “hard problem” upside down and sideways.
J. Conscious. Stud. 3 (4), 313–329.
Hutto, Daniel, 2023. Enactivism. Internet Encycloped. Philosop. https://iep.utm.edu/en
activism/. (Accessed 29 August 2023).
Huxley, Aldous, 1946. The Perennial Philosophy. Fontana Books.
Integral theory (Ken Wilber), 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last
revision: 19 January 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integral_th
eory_(Ken_Wilber)&oldid=1197074213.
Interactionism (philosophy of mind), 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last
revision: 8 October 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interactioni
sm_(philosophy_of_mind)&oldid=1179163909.
Islamic Soul-Body, 2020. The Soul-Body Relation in ˙Islamic Philosophy. Turkish studies.
https://turkishstudies.net/social?mod=makale_ing_ozet&makale_id=46134#:~:te
xt=In%20the%20philosophy%20of%20Islam,the%20soul%20preserves%20its%
20individuality.
Ivory Research, 2019. Is language necessary for consciousness? https://www.ivoryrese
arch.com/samples/is-language-necessary-for-consciousness/.
Ivry, Alfred, 2012. Arabic and islamic psychology and philosophy of mind. In:
Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2012
Edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2012/entries/arabic-isla
mic-mind/.
Jackson, Frank, 1982. Epiphenomenal qualia. Phil. Q. 32, 127–136.
Jackson, Frank, 1986. What mary didn’t know. J. Philos. 83 (5), 291–295 (May 1986).
Jackson, Frank, 1995. Postscript on “what mary didn’t know”. In: Moser, P., Trout, J.
(Eds.), Contemporary Materialism. Routledge, London.
Jackson, Frank, 1997. Three questions about consciousness review of consciousness and
experience by William G. Lycan. Psyche 3 (5) (review).
Jackson, Frank, 1998. Postscript on qualia. In: Jackson, Frank (Ed.), Mind, Methods and
Conditionals. Routledge.
Jackson, Frank, 2007. The knowledge argument, diaphanousness, representationalism.
In: Alter, Torin, Walter, Sven (Eds.), Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal
Knowledge. Oxford University Press.
Jackson, Frank, 2023. Forward. In: Kind, Amy, Stoljar, Daniel (Eds.), What Is
Consciousness? (Little Debates about Big Questions). Taylor and Francis, Kindle
Edition, p. xv.
Jaimungal, Curt, 2014a. Personal Communication.
Jaimungal, Curt, 2014b. The string theory iceberg EXPLAINED. Theor. Everything. https
://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X4PdPnQuwjY&t=72s.
James, William, 1890. Principles of Psychology. Henry Holt and Company, p. 3.
James, William, 1900. Human Immortality: Two Supposed Objections to the Doctrine,
second ed. Houghton, Mifflin (Original work published 1898.).
James, Michael, 2012. Happiness and the Art of being: An introduction to the philosophy and
practice of the spiritual teachings of Bhagavan Sri Ramana. Michael D A James.
Happiness of being. n.d. https://www.happinessofbeing.com/index.html.
James, Michael, 2024. Personal Communication.
Jaworski, William, 2016. Structure and the Metaphysics of Mind: How Hylomorphism
Solves the Mind-Body Problem. Oxford University Press.
Jaworski, William, 2020. Hylomorphism and the construct of consciousness. Topoi 39
(5), 1125–1139.
Jaynes, Julian, 1976. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral
Mind. Houghton Mifflin Company.
Jaynes, Julian, 1987. Consciousness and the voices of the mind. Can. Psychol. 27 (2).
April 1986.
Johnson, Michael Edward, 2023. Qualia formalism and a symmetry theory of valence.
https://opentheory.net/Qualia_Formalism_and_a_Symmetry_Theory_of_Valence.pdf.
Jones, Mostyn, 2013. Electromagnetic-field theories of mind. J. Conscious. Stud. 20
(11–12), 2013. Thanks to Galen Strawson for suggesting Mostyn Jones.
Jones, Mostyn, 2017. Mounting evidence that minds are neural EM fields interacting
with brains. J. Conscious. Stud. 24 (1–2).
Jones, Mostyn, 2024. A simple, testable mind–body solution? J. Conscious. Stud. 31
(1–2), 51–75. https://doi.org/10.53765/20512201.31.1.051, 25.
Josephson, Brian, 2004. How we might be able to Understand the Brain. https://we
b-archive.southampton.ac.uk/cogprints.org/5225/02/ICCS2004.paper.pdf.
Josephson, Brian, 2012a. Is ESP a window on a larger reality? Closer To Truth
closertotruth.com/video/josbr-005/?referrer=8389. Brian Josephson on Closer To
Truth—7 CTT videos and 1 CTT TV episode—. https://closertotruth.com/contribut
or/brian-josephson/.
Josephson, Brian, 2012b. Must the universe contain consciousness? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/josbr-003/?referrer=8143.
Josephson, Brian, 2015. How observers create reality. https://philpapers.org/archive/J
OSHOC.pdf.
Josephson, Brian, 2021. Beyond the ‘theory of everything’ paradigm: synergetic patterns
and the order of the natural world. https://philpapers.org/archive/JOSBTT.pdf.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2019. Issue theme: Debates on the Meta-Problem of
Consciousness 26, 9–10. https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/imp/jcs/201
9/00000026/f0020009.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2021. Issue theme: Is Consciousness Everywhere?
Essays on Panpsychism 28, 9–10. https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/imp/jc
s/2021/00000028/f0020009.
Kafatos, Menas, Tanzi, Rudolph, Chopra, Deepak, 2011. How consciousness becomes the
physical universe. J. Cosmol. 14, 2011.
Kafatos, Menas, Banerji, Debashish, Struppa, Daniele (Eds.), 2024. Quantum and
Consciousness Revisited. D.K. Printworld and Nalanda Consciousness Network.
Kamen, Edward W., Kamen, Roger D., 2023. The human soul as a type of quantum field.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/374749062_The_Human_Soul_as_a_Ty
pe_of_Quantum_Field.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2016a. On why Idealism is superior to Physicalism and
Micropsychism. https://www.bernardokastrup.com/2016/01/on-why-idealism-is-
superior-to.html.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2016b. The idealist view of consciousness after death. J. Conscious.
Explorat. Res. 7 (11). December 2016.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2017. An ontological solution to the mind-body problem.
Philosophies 2, 10, 2017.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2018. The universe in consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 25 (5–6).
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2019. Analytic Idealism: A Consciousness-Only Ontology. Radboud
University Nijmegen, Dissertation, 2019.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2020a. The Universal Mind. Institute of Art and Ideas. https://iai.
tv/articles/the-universal-mind-kastrup-goff-idealism-auid-1586?_auid=2020.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2020b. The irony of Philip Goff’s arguments. https://www.bernardok
astrup.com/2020/07/the-irony-of-philip-goffs-arguments.html.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2023. The lunacy of ‘machine consciousness.’ the Institute of Art and
Ideas. https://iai.tv/articles/bernardo-kastrup-the-lunacy-of-machine-conscious
ness-auid-2363.
Kastrup, Bernardo, 2024. Analytic Idealism in a Nutshell: a straightforward summary of
the 21st century’s only plausible metaphysics. Iff Books.
Kastrup, Bernardo, Stapp, Henry, Kafatos, Menas, 2018. Coming to grips with the
implications of quantum mechanics. Sci. Am. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/
observations/coming-to-grips-with-the-implications-of-quantum-mechanics/.
Kauffman, Stuart, 2019. What are breakthroughs in science? (Part 3). Closer to truth.
closertotruth.com/video/kaust-011/?referrer=7442. What Exists (Part 3). Closer To
Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/kaust-018/?referrer=7599. Stuart Kauffman
on Closer To Truth—21 CTT videos and 8 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.
com/contributor/stuart-kauffman/.
Kauffman, Stuart, 2023. Personal Communication.
Kauffman, Stuart, Radin, Dean, 2020. Quantum aspects of the brain-mind relationship: a
hypothesis with supporting evidence. Biosystems 223, 104820, 2023 Jan.
Kauffman, Stuart, Roli, Andrea, 2022. What is Consciousness? Biol. J. Linn. Soc.
Kelly, Edward, 2024. Personal Communication.
Kelly, E.F., Marshall, P. (Eds.), 2021. Consciousness Unbound: Liberating Mind from the
Tyranny of Materialism. Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD.
Kelly, E.F., Kelly, E.W., Crabtree, A., Gauld, A., Grosso, M., Greyson, B. (Eds.), 2007.
Irreducible Mind: toward a Psychology for the 21st Century. Rowman & Littlefield,
Lanham, MD.
Kelly, E.F., Crabtree, A., Marshall, P. (Eds.), 2015. Beyond Physicalism: toward
Reconciliation of Science and Spirituality. Rowman & Littlefield.
Kerr, Catherine, Jones, Stephanie, et al., 2011. Effects of mindfulness meditation training
on anticipatory alpha modulation in primary somatosensory cortex. Brain Res. Bull.
85 (Issues 3–4), 30 May 2011. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S0361923011001341?via%3Dihub.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
164
Kim, Jaegwon, 2024. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 6 March
2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jaegwon_Kim&oldid=121
2099576.
Kind, Amy, 2010. Transparency and representationalist theories of consciousness. Philos.
Compass 5.
Kind, Amy, Stoljar, Daniel, 2023. What Is Consciousness? (Little Debates about Big
Questions. Taylor and Francis. Thanks to Uziel Awret for suggesting Daniel Stoljar
and Amy Kind, Kindle Edition.
Kleiner, Johannes, Ludwig, Tim, 2023. What is a mathematical structure of conscious
experience? https://arxiv.org/pdf/2301.11812.pdf.
Koch, Christof, 2004. The Quest for Consciousness: a Neurobiological Approach. US-CO:
Roberts & Company Publishers, Englewood.
Koch, Christof, 2012a. Consciousness: Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist. The MIT
Press.
Koch, Christof, 2012b. Does brain make mind? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/kocch-002/?referrer=8067. Christof Koch on Closer To Truth—30 CTT
videos and 12 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/christ
of-koch/.
Koch, Christof, 2012c. Can consciousness be non-biological? (Part 1). Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/kocch-006/?referrer=8531.
Koch, Christof, 2019. Consciousness doesn’t depend on language. Nautilus. (excerpted
from Koch, Christof, 2019. The Feeling of Life Itself: Why Consciousness is
Widespread but Can’t Be Computed. The MIT Press). https://nautil.us/conscious
ness-doesnt-depend-on-language-237555/.
Koch, Christof, 2021. Reflections of a natural scientist on panpsychism. J. Conscious.
Stud. 28, 9–10.
Koch, Christof, 2024. Then I Am Myself the World: What Consciousness Is and How to
Expand It. Basic Books. Kindle Edition.
Koch, Christof, Massimini, M., Boly, M., et al., 2016. Neural correlates of consciousness:
progress and problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17 https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn.2016.22.
Koestler, Arthur, 1972. The Roots of Coincidence. Random House.
Kopel, Jonathan, 2023. Near-death experiences and emergent dualism. Theol. Sci. 21, 2.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14746700.2023.2188374.
Koyoti, Michael, 2023. Is-ness: science, consciousness, spirit. Koyoti Edge.
Krauss, Lawrence, 2023. The Edge of Knowledge: Unsolved Mysteries of the Cosmos. Post
Hill Press, Kindle Edition, p. 195.
Kuhn, Robert, 1969. The human mind. Probe ‘69. The University of Witwatersrand.
http://rlkuhn.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/Probe-69-Human-Mind-Kuhn
-1969.pdf.
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2000a. Closer to Truth: Challenging Current Belief. McGraw
Hill.
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2000b. What are the big questions of science. Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/what-are-the-big-questions-of-science/?referrer
=8756.
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2013. Levels of nothing. Skeptic Magaz. 18 (2). https://rlkuhn.
com/wp-content/uploads/Closer-to-Truth-Essays/Levels-of-Nothing-Robert-Lawre
nce-Kuhn-Skeptic-magazine-2013.pdf.
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2016a. Virtual immortality: why the mind-body problem is still
a problem. Skeptic Magaz. 21 (2).
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2016b. Does your ’self’ have a soul? Live Sci. https://www.
livescience.com/56505-do-you-have-a-soul.html.
Kuhn, Robert Lawrence, 2023. Asking ultimate questions. Closer To Truth. https://close
rtotruth.com/video/robert-lawrence-kuhn-asking-ultimate-questions/.
Kurzweil, Raymond, 2007. What things are conscious? Closer to truth. https://closertotru
th.com/video/kurra-008/?referrer=7787.
Labh, Sunny, 2024. How mathematics can help us understand consciousness. Cantor’s
paradise. https://www.cantorsparadise.com/how-mathematics-can-help-us-under
stand-consciousness-77ac0f9ac12f.
Lahav, Nir, Neemeh, Z.A., 2022. A relativistic theory of consciousness. Front. Psychol.
6102 (Personal communication).
Lakoff, George, 2007. How philosophy illuminates the physical world. Closer to truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/lakge-004/?referrer=7610. George Lakoff on
Closer To Truth— 9 CTT videos and 2 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/c
ontributor/george-lakoff/.
Lakoff, George, 2012. Explaining embodied cognition results. Topic. Cognit. Sci. 4
(2012).
Lakoff, George, Johnson, Mark, 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh: the Embodied Mind and
its Challenge to Western Thought. Basic Books.
Lamme, Victor, 2006. Towards a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends Cognit. Sci.
10 (Issue 11) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.001.
Lamme, Victor, 2010. How neuroscience will change our view on consciousness. Cognit.
Neurosci. 1 (3), 204–220. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588921003731586, 2010 Sep.
Langan, Christopher, 2002. The Cognitive-Theoretic Model of the Universe: A New Kind
of Reality Theory. Mega Foundation Press.
Langan, Christopher, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 27
January 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christopher_Langan&o
ldid=1199629273.
Lanier, Jaron, 2007a. Is consciousness an illusion? Closer to truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/lanja-006/?referrer=8137. Jaron Lanier on Closer To Truth—11 CTT videos
and 4 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/jaron-lanier/.
Lanier, Jaron, 2007b. Is consciousness an ultimate fact? Closer To Truth. https://closerto
truth.com/video/lanja-007/?referrer=7843.
Lau, Hakwan, 2019a. Consciousness, metacognition, & perceptual reality monitoring.
PsyArXiv Preprints. https://psyarxiv.com/ckbyf/.
Lau, Hakwan, 2019b. Is consciousness a battle between your beliefs and perceptions?
Aeon. April 9, 2019. https://aeon.co/ideas/is-consciousness-a-battle-between-your-
beliefs-and-perceptions.
Lau, Hakwan, 2022. In Consciousness We Trust: the Cognitive Neuroscience of Subjective
Experience. Oxford University Press.
Lau, Hakwan, 2023. What is a pseudoscience of consciousness? PsyArXiv Preprints.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/28z3y.
Laughlin, C., 2023. Consciousness as an intelligent complex adapttive system: a
neuroanthropological perspective. Anthropol. Conscious. 1–27. https://doi.org/
10.1111/anoc.12213, 2023;001.
Lawlor, Leonard, Moulard-Leonard, Valentine, 2021. Henri Bergson. In: Zalta, Edward
N., Nodelman, Uri (Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Winter 2022
Edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2022/entries/bergson/.
Lawson, E. Thomas, 1993. Rethinking Religion: Connecting Cognition and Culture.
Cambridge University Press.
Lawson, Hilary., 2001. Closure: A Story of Everything. Routledge.
LeDoux, Joseph, 2019. The Deep History of Ourselves: the Four-Billion-Year Story of
How We Got Conscious Brains. The MIT Press.
LeDoux, Joseph, 2021. As soon as there was life, there was danger: the deep history of
survival behaviours and the shallower history of consciousness. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B
377, 20210292. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2021.0292.
LeDoux, Joseph, 2023a. The Four Realms of Existence - A New Theory of Being Human.
Harvard University Press.
LeDoux, Joseph, 2023b. The deep history of ourselves: the four-billion-year story of how
we got conscious brains. Phil. Psychol. 36 (4) https://doi.org/10.1080/
09515089.2022.2160311.
LeDoux, Joseph, Brown, Richard, 2017. A higher-order theory of emotional
consciousness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114 (10), E2016–E2025. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1619316114.
Lenharo, Mariana, 2023a. Decades-long bet on consciousness ends—and it’s philosopher
1, neuroscientist 0. Nature. NEWS. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-02120-8,
24 June 2023.
Lenharo, Mariana, 2023b. Consciousness theory slammed as ‘pseudoscience’—sparking
uproar. Nature, 20 September 2023. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-02
3-02971-1.
Lenharo, Mariana, 2024. AI consciousness: scientists say we urgently need answers.
Nature 21. December 2023. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-02
3-04047-6.
Leslie, John, 2001. Infinite Minds. Oxford University Press.
Leslie, John, 2006. Is consciousness irreducible, closer to truth -. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/lesjo-008/?referrer=7845. Leslie, John. Closer To Truth—36 CTT videos
and 18 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/john-leslie/.
Leslie, John, 2013. Existing because ethically required. The mystery of existence. In:
John, Leslie, Robert Lawrence, Kuhn (Eds.), Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 126–141.
Levin, Michael, 2022. Technological approach to mind everywhere: an experimentally-
grounded framework for understanding diverse bodies and minds, 24 March 2022
Front. Syst. Neurosci. 16. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2022.768201, 2022.
Levin, Janet, 2023. Functionalism. In: Zalta, Edward N., Nodelman, Uri (Eds.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2023 Edition. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2023/entries/functionalism/.
Levine, Joseph, 2019. On the meta-problem. J. Conscious. Stud. 26 (9–10), 148–159.
Llinas, Rodolfo, 2002. I of the Vortex: from Neurons to Self. Bradford Books.
Llinas, Rodolfo, 2007. Can brain explain mind? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/lliro-002/?referrer=8494. Rodolfo Linas on Closer To Truth—12 CTT
videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/rodolfo
-llinas/.
Lobo, Lorena, et al., 2018. The history and philosophy of ecological psychology. Front.
Psychol., 27 November 2018 Sec. Cognit. Sci. 9 https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2018.02228.
Loke, Andrew Ter Ern, 2022. The Origin of Humanity and Evolution. T&T Clark.
Loorits, Kristjan, 2014. Structural qualia: a solution to the hard problem of
consciousness, 2014 Front. Psychol. 5, 237. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.00237. I learned about Loortis via George Musser, 2023.
Loorits, Kristjan, 2018. The location and boundaries of consciousness: a structural realist
approach. Rev. Philosop. Psychol. 9 (3) https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-018-0385-
4.
Loorits, Kristjan, 2019. Phenomenal Consciousness as a Structure in Our Brains.
Dissertation, Department of Philosophy, History and Art Studies. University of
Helsinki, Finland. https://helda.helsinki.fi/server/api/core/bitstreams/7d37bd
98-4b75-4314-86f6-f2d79f2885de/content.
Loorits, Kristjan, 2022. Qualities in the world, in science, and in consciousness.
J. Conscious. Stud. 29, 11–12. https://doi.org/10.53765/20512201.29.11.108,
2022.
Love, Shayla, 2023. What happens to the brain during consciousness-ending meditation?
Aeon. https://psyche.co/ideas/what-happens-to-the-brain-during-consciousness-en
ding-meditation.
Lu, Meijuan, et al., 2022. How Chinese medicine theory expands the dimensions of our
understanding of consciousness. Mind Matter 20 (1), 159–166. https://www.ingent
aconnect.com/content/imp/mm/2022/00000020/00000001/art00010 (Thanks to
Alex Gomez-Marin for the suggestion).
Lycan, William G., 1987. Consciousness. The MIT Press.
Lycan, William G., 1996. Consciousness and Experience. The MIT Press.
Lycan, William G., 2004. The plurality of consciousness. In: Larrazabal, J.M., Perez
Miranda, L.A. (Eds.), Language, Knowledge, and Representation. Kluwer Academic
Publishing. https://soar.suny.edu/bitstream/handle/20.500.12648/3208/phil_e
x/vol32/iss1/2/fulltext%20(1).pdf?sequence=1.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
165
Lycan, William, 2019. Representational theories of consciousness. In: Zalta, Edward N.
(Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2019 Edition). https://plato.stan
ford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/consciousness-representational/.
Ma, Jin, Huang, Kao-Cheng, Chen, Kewei, 2023. Unifying Consciousness and Memory: A
Neutral Framework for Modeling and Measuring Consciousness through Memory-
Related Thought Process. Personal communication.
Macdonald, Cynthia, Macdonald, Graham, 2019. Emergence and Non-reductive
Physicalism. The Routledge Handbook of Emergence. Routledge.
Maharaj, Ayon, 2020. Panentheistic cosmopsychism: Swami Vivekananda’s S¯aṃkhya-
Ved¯antic solution to the hard problem of consciousness. Panentheism and
panpsychism. In: Godehard, Brüntrup, Benedikt Paul, G¨ocke, Ludwig, Jaskolla
(Eds.), Brill Mentis.
Mansell, Warren, 2022. An Integrative Control Theory Perspective on Consciousness.
Psychological Review. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1037/
rev0000384 (Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin for suggesting Mansell).
Maturana, Humberto, Varela, Francisco, 1980. Autopoiesis and Cognition: the
Realization of the Living, second ed. Springer.
McFadden, Johnjoe, 2002. Synchronous firing and its influence on the brain’s
electromagnetic field. J. Conscious. Stud. 9 (4).
McFadden, Johnjoe, 2020. Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field
theory of consciousness. Neurosci. Consciousness 6 (1), niaa016. https://doi.org/
10.1093/nc/niaa016, 2020.
McFadden, Johnjoe, 2023. Consciousness: matter or EMF? Front. Hum. Neurosci. 16,
1024934 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2022.1024934.
McGilchrist, Iain, 2009. The Master and His Emissary: the Divided Brain and the Making
of the Western World. Yale University Press.
McGilchrist, Iain, 2021a. The Matter with Things: Our Brains, Our Delusions and the
Unmaking of the World. Perspectiva Press.
McGilchrist, Iain, 2021b. Consciousness Is the Stuff of the Cosmos. Essentia Foundation.
https://www.essentiafoundation.org/iain-mcgilchrist-consciousness-is-the-stuff-of-t
he-cosmos/reading/.
McGinn, Colin, 1989. Can we solve the mind-body problem? Mind. New Ser. 98 (391)
(Jul. 1989). (McGinn acknowledges his “large debt” to Thomas Nagel.
McGinn, Colin, 1993. Cosmology and consciousness: hyperdualism ventilated. In:
Davies, M., Humphreys, G.W. (Eds.), Consciousness. Blackwell, p. 160.
McGinn, Colin, 2000. The Mysterious Flame - Conscious Minds in a Material World. Basic
Books.
McGinn, Colin, 2007a. Is consciousness irreducible? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/
video/mcgco-010/?referrer=7845. Colin McGinn on Closer To Truth—18 CTT videos
and 14 CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/colin-mcginn/.
McGinn, Colin, 2007b. Solutions to the mind-body problem closer to truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/mcgco-011/?referrer=8199.
McLaughlin, Brian, Bennett, Karen, 2021. Supervenience. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 Edition. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/sum2021/entries/supervenience/.
Medhananda, Swami, 2022. Swami Vivekananda’s Ved¯antic Cosmopolitanism. Oxford
University Press.
Medhananda, Swami, 2023. Person, Self, Soul, Spirit (Part II). closertotruth.com/video/
medsw-005/?referrer=34587. The Nature of the Human Person (Part 1). Closer To
Truth. closertotruth.com/video/medsw-007/?referrer=30176. Swami Medhananda
on Closer To Truth—15 CTT videos and 11 CTT episodes—. https://closertotruth.co
m/contributor/swami-medhananda/.
Mehta, Neil, Mashour, George, 2013. General and specific consciousness: a first-order
representationalist approach. Front. Psychol. 4, 407. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00407, 2013.
Meijer, Dirk K.F., 2018. Universal consciousness: collective evidence on the basis of
current physics and philosophy of mind. Part 1. https://www.researchgate.net/publi
cation/328538224_Universal_Consciousness_Collective_Evidence_on_the_Basis_of_
Current_Physics_and_Philosophy_of_Mind_Part_1.
Meijer, Dirk K.F., Jerman, Igor, et al., 2020a. Consciousness in the universe is tuned by a
musical master code, Part 1: a conformal mental attribute of reality. Quant. Biosyst.
11 (1), 1–31, 2020.
Meijer, Dirk K.F., Jerman, Igor, et al., 2020b. Consciousness in the universe is tuned by a
musical master code, Part 2: the hard problem in consciousness studies revisited.
Quant. Biosyst. 11 (1), 31–71, 2020.
Meijer, Dirk K.F., Jerman, Igor, et al., 2020c. Consciousness in the universe is tuned by a
musical master code, Part 3: a hydrodynamic superfluid quantum space guides a
conformal mental attribute of reality. Quant. Biosyst. 1 (1), 72–107, 2020.
Mental representation, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 9
January 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mental_representation
&oldid=1146913639.
Metzinger, Thomas, 2000. The subjectivity of subjective experience: a representationalist
analysis of the first-person perspective. Metzinger, Thomas. Neural Correlates of
Consciousness – Empirical and Conceptual Questions. The MIT Press.
Metzinger, Thomas, 2004. Being No One: the Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity. The MIT
Press.
Metzinger, Thomas, 2015. M-Autonomy. J. Conscious. Stud. 22 (11–12), 270–302, 2015.
Metzinger, Thomas, 2024. The Elephant and the Blind: the Experience of Pure
Consciousness: Philosophy, Science, and 500+ Experiential Reports. The MIT Press.
Minsky, Marvin, 1986. The Society of Mind. Simon and Schuster.
Minsky, Marvin, 2007a. Why is consciousness so mysterious? Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/minma-011/?referrer=8151. Marvin Minsky on Closer To
Truth—13 CTT videos and 7 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contribut
or/marvin-minsky/.
Minsky, Marvin, 2007b. What are Brains? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/vi
deo/minma-009/?referrer=7837.
Mishlove, Jeffrey, 2021. Beyond the brain—the survival of human consciousness after
permanent bodily death. https://www.bigelowinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2
022/10/mishlove-beyond-brain.pdf.
Mitchell, Kevin J., 2023. Free Agents. Princeton University Press, Kindle Edition.
Mole, Christopher, 2013. The conscious brain: how attention engenders experience.
Notre Dame Philosophic. Rev. (review) https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/the-conscio
us-brain-how-attention-engenders-experience/.
Mollan, Charles, 2007. It’s Part of what We Are: Some Irish Contributors to the
Development of the Chemical and Physical Sciences, vol. 1. Royal Dublin Society,
p. 1628.
Montero, Barbara, 2012. Physicalism. Review of physicalism by Daniel stoljar. Notre dame
philosophical review. https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/physicalism/.
Moreland, J.P., 2014. The Soul: How We Know It’s Real and Why it Matters. Moody
Press.
Moreland, J.P., 2018. In defense of a thomistic-like dualism. In: Menuge, Angus,
Loose, Jonathan, Moreland, J.P. (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Substance
Dualism. Wiley-Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119468004.ch7.
Moreland, J.P., 2023. Responding to a potpourri of objections to the modal argument.
J. Conscious. Stud. 30, 5–6.
Murphy, Nancey, 2017. What is human mind in a theistic world? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/murna-021/?referrer=7683. Nancey Murphy on Closer
To Truth—29 CTT videos and 9 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contrib
utor/nancey-murphy/.
Murphy, Nancey Claire, 2018. For Non-reductive physicalism. In: Menuge, Angus,
Loose, Jonathan, Moreland, J.P. (Eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Substance
Dualism. Wiley-Blackwell.
Musser, George, 2023a. Reality is your brain’s best guess. Nautilus. June 20, 2023. https
://nautil.us/reality-is-your-brains-best-guess-312269/.
Musser, George, 2023b. Putting Ourselves Back in the Equation: Why Physicists Are
Studying Human Consciousness and AI to Unravel the Mysteries of the Universe.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Musser, George, 2024. Can quantum hints in the brain revive a radical consciousness
theory? New Scientist. 17 January 2024. https://www.newscientist.com/arti
cle/mg26134740-800-can-quantum-hints-in-the-brain-revive-a-radical-consciousn
ess-theory/.
Must the Universe Contain Consciousness. (n.d.) Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/davpa-015/?referrer=8143.
Myers, F.W.H., 1903. Human Personality and its Survival of Bodily Death (2 vols.).
Longmans, London (Green).
Nader, Tony (n.d.) Website. https://www.drtonynader.com.
Nader, Tony, 2015. Editorial. Consciousness is all there is: a mathematical approach with
applications. Int. J. Mathem. Conscious. 1. Number 1. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3824373.
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2008. God and Phenomenal Consciousness: A Novel Approach to
Knowledge Arguments. Cambridge University Press.
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2010. The knowledge argument and epiphenomenalism. Erkenntnis 72
(1).
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2012a. Anything non-physical about the mind? Closer to truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/nagyu-004/?referrer=7955. Yujin Nagasawa on Closer
To Truth—31 CTT videos and 9 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contr
ibutor/yujin-nagasawa/.
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2012b. Infinite decomposability and the mind-body problem. Am. Phil.
Q. 49 (4).
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2019. Panpsychism versus Pantheism, Polytheism, and
Cosmopsychism. The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. Routledge.
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2021. A Panpsychist Dead End, xcv.. Aristotelian Society
Supplementary Volume. https://doi.org/10.1093/arisup/aka011.
Nagasawa, Yujin, 2023. Consciousness as ultimate (Part I). Closer To Truth. https://close
rtotruth.com/video/nagyu-032/?referrer=30155.
Nagel, Thomas, 1974. What is it like to Be a bat? Phil. Rev. 83 (4), 435–450.
Nagel, Thomas, 1979. Panpsychism. In: Nagel, Thomas (Ed.), Mortal Questions. Canto,
1979.
Nagel, Thomas, 1986. The View from Nowhere. Oxford University Press.
Nagel, Thomas, 1997. The Last Word. Oxford University Press.
Nagel, Thomas, 2012. Mind & Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception
of Nature Is Almost Certainly False. Oxford University Press.
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, 2007. Eternal life is like what? Closer to truth -. https://closertotru
th.com/video/eternal-life-is-like-what/. Seyyed Hossein Nasr on Closer To Truth
-—10 CTT videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/s
eyyed-hossein-nasr/.
Nayak, Sandeep, Griffiths, Roland, 2022. A single belief-changing psychedelic experience
is associated with increased attribution of consciousness to living and non-living
entities, 28 March 2022 Front. Psychol. 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2022.852248, 2022.
New mysterianism, 2023. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 28
November 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_mysterianism
&oldid=1154434220.
The Nine Consciousness, 2022. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 14
March 2022 09:13 UTC. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Nine_Co
nsciousness&oldid=1077053814.
No¨e, Alva, 2007. Is consciousness an illusion? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/noeal-004/?referrer=8137. Alva No¨e on Closer To Truth—12 CTT videos
and 2 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/alva-noe/.
No¨e, Alva., 2010. Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain, and Other Lessons from
the Biology of Consciousness. Hill and Wang.
No¨e, Alva, 2012. Varieties of Presence. Harvard University Press.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
166
Northoff, Georg, 2021. Why is there Sentience? J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (7–8), 67–82,
2021.
Northoff, Georg, 2022. My way to non-reductive neurophilosophy. J. NeuroPhilosop. 1
(2), 240–244. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7254063, 2022.
Northoff, Georg, et al., 2020. Spatiotemporal neuroscience – what is it and why we need
it. July 2020 Phys. Life Rev. 33, 78–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
plrev.2020.06.005 (Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin for suggesting Northoff).
Nutt, David, 2023. Entropy explains consciousness. Instit. Art Ideas. https://iai.tv/a
rticles/david-nutt-entropy-explains-consciousness-auid-2528.
Ogas, Ogi, Gaddam, Sai, 2022. Journey of the Mind: How Thinking Emerged from Chaos.
W. W. Norton & Company.
Oizumi, Masafumi, Albantakis, Larissa, Tononi, Giulio, 2014. From the phenomenology
to the mechanisms of consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 10 (5), e1003588 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588.
https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003588.
Olson, Eric, Segal, Aaron, 2023. Do We Have a Soul? A Debate. Routledge.
Ouellette, Jennifer, 2016. A new spin on the quantum brain. Quanta Magazine. htt
ps://www.quantamagazine.org/a-new-spin-on-the-quantum-brain-20161102/.
Ouellette, Jennifer, 2018. Brains may teeter near their tipping point. Quanta Magazine.
June 14, 2018. https://www.quantamagazine.org/brains-may-teeter-near-their-tipp
ing-point-20180614.
Pace, Michael, 2007. Blurred vision and the transparency of experience. Pac. Phil. Q.
August 2007.
Paddock, Silvia, Buervenich, Thomas, 2023. Plato’s Prisoners. TaleTekk.
Palmer, Thomas, 2023. Quantum computing is the key to consciousness. IAI News.
/articles/tim-palmer-quantum-computing-is-the-key-to-consciousness-auid-2410.
Papineau, David, 2003. Could there be a science of consciousness? Phil. Issues 13
(Philosophy of Mind).
Papineau, David, 2019. Response to Chalmers’ ‘the meta-problem of consciousness’.
J. Conscious. Stud. 26, 9–10.
Papineau, David, 2020a. The problem of consciousness. In: Kriegel, Uriah (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of Consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Papineau, David, 2020b. We must shed our metaphysical assumptions. Instit. Art Ideas.
https://iai.tv/articles/we-must-shed-our-metaphysical-assumptions-auid-1367.
Papineau, David, 2022. Review of Vagueness and the Evolution of consciousness: Through
the looking glass by Michael Tye. Notre Dame Philosophic. Rev. July 7, 2022
https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/vagueness-and-the-evolution-of-consciousness-th
rough-the-looking-glass/.
Parnia, Sam, 2014. What do near death experiences mean? Closer to truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/parsa-004/?referrer=7750. Sam Parnia on Closer To Truth—5
CTT videos and 1 CTT episode—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/sam-parnia/.
Parnia, Sam, et al., 2022. Guidelines and standards for the study of death and recalled
experiences of death—a multidisciplinary consensus statement and proposed future
directions. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1511 (1), 2022 May.
Parrington, John, 2023. Consciousness: How Our Brains Turn Matter into Meaning. Icon
Books.
Pascal, Andre, 2023. Bergson Vocabulary (Unpublished paper).
Patra, S., 2023. Quantum-like cognition and reality. Paper in progress.
Penrose, Roger, 1996. Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of
Consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Penrose, Roger, 1999. The Emperor’s New Mind - Concerning Computers, Minds, and the
Law of Physics. Oxford University Press.
Penrose, Roger, 2014. Quantum physics of consciousness. Closer to truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/penro-011/?referrer=7937. Roger Penrose on Closer To
Truth—20 CTT videos and 7 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contribut
or/roger-penrose/.
Penrose, Roger, 2023. Consciousness & new physics. Closer to truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/sir-roger-penrose-on-consciousness-and-new-physics/.
Pepperell, Robert, 2018. Consciousness as a physical process caused by the organization
of energy in the brain, 01 November 2018. Sec. Consciousness Research Front.
Psychol. 9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02091, 2018.
Pereira Jr., Alfredo, 2021. The role of sentience in the theory of consciousness and
medical practice. J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (7–8).
Philosophy of psychedelics, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision:
12 September 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_ps
ychedelics&oldid=1175021242.
PhilPapers Survey, 2009. https://philpapers.org/surveys/results.pl?affil=All+respon
dents&areas0=0&areas_max=1&grain=coarse.
PhilPapers Survey, 2020. https://philarchive.org/archive/BOUPOP-3.
Pigliucci, Massimo, 2023a. Philosophy of Evolutionary Cognition, Emotion,
Consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/pigma-004/?refe
rrer=36211. Massimo Pigliucci on Closer To Truth—16 CTT videos and 5 CTT TV
episodes—. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/massimo-pigliucci/.
Pigliucci, Massimo, 2023b. Why is Consciousness So Baffling? (Part 1). Closer To Truth.
https://closertotruth.com/video/pigma-013/?referrer=7830.
Pinotsis, Dimitris, Miller, Earl, 2022. Beyond dimension reduction: stable electric fields
emerge from and allow representational drift. Neuroimage 253, 119058.
Pockett, Susan, 2012. The electromagnetic field theory of consciousness. J. Conscious.
Stud. 19 (No), 11–12.
Pockett, Susan, 2017. Consciousness is a thing, not a process. Appl. Sci. 7 (12), 1248.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app7121248.
Polger, Thomas, Flanagan, Owen, 2001. A decade of teleofunctionalism: Lycan’s
consciousness and consciousness and experience. Minds Mach. 11 (1) (review).
Polkinghorne, John, 2001. Faith, Science and Understanding. Yale University Press.
Polkinghorne, John, 2003. The God of Hope and the End of the World. Yale University
Press.
Polkinghorne, John, 2007. All things new. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/poljo-001/?referrer=8425. John Polkinghorne on Closer To Truth—29 CTT
videos and 18 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/john-polk
inghorne/.
Polkinghorne, John, 2009. Mind and matter: a physicist’s view, 24 February 2009 Phil.
Invest.. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9205.2008.01365.x.
Possibilianism, 2022. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 21 April
2022. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Possibilianism&oldid=1
083909954.
Poznanski, Roman, 2024. The dynamic organicity theory of consciousness: how
consciousness arises from the functionality of multiscale complexity in the material
brain. J. Multiscale Neurosci. 3 (1), 68–87. https://doi.org/10.56280/1609121701.
Prakash, C., Fields, C., Hoffman, D.D., Prentner, R., Singh, M., 2020. Fact, fiction, and
fitness. Entropy 22 (5), 514, 2020 Apr 30.
Pratt, Joseph, 2020. Time and space within daoism’s holistic worldview. SSRN. https://
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3406672.
Pratt, Joseph, 2023. Personal Communication.
Predestination, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 22 January
2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Predestination&oldid=11
54032814.
Prinz, Jesse J., 2012. The Conscious Brain: How Attention Engenders Experience. Oxford
University Press.
Proust, Joelle, 2003. Review of Consciousness and Language. Notre Dame Philosophical
Review. Can psychedelic drugs uncover the secrets of consciousness?, 2022 Nature.
September 28, 2022. https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-03013-y.
Psychedelics Sync Neurons, 2023. A glimpse into consciousness & psychosis. Neurosci.
News. August 8. https://neurosciencenews.com/psychedelics-neurons-consciousness
-23772/.
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo, 2007. Mind, Matter and the Implicate Order. Springer.
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo, 2018. Quantum theories of consciousness. In: Gennaro, Rocco (Ed.),
The Routledge Handbook of Consciousness. Routledge, pp. 216–231.
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo, 2019. Quantum theory and the place of mind in the causal order of
things. In: De Barros, J., Montemayor, Carlos (Eds.), Quanta and Mind: Essays on the
Connection between Quantum Mechanics and the Consciousness. Springer
Publishing Company, pp. 163–171.
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo, 2022. Is the brain analogous to a quantum measuring apparatus? In:
Wuppuluri, Shyam, Grayling, Anthony C. (Eds.), Metaphors and Analogies in
Sciences and Humanities: Words and Worlds. Springer Synthese Library,
pp. 215–235.
Qualia Research Institute. (n.d.) FAQ. https://qri.org/faq. Retrieved: 15 March 2024.
Rabeyron, Thomas, 2020. Why most research findings about psi are false: the
replicability crisis, the psi paradox and the myth of sisyphus. Front. Psychol. 11,
562992 https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.562992.
Radin, Dean, 2007. Is consciousness irreducible? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/
video/radde-009/?referrer=7845. Dean Radin on Closer To Truth—7 CTT TV
episodes and 12 CTT videos. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/dean.
Radin, Dean, 2018. Real Magic: Ancient Wisdom, Modern Science, and a Guide to the
Secret Power of the Universe. Harmony.
Radin, Dean, 2022. On Psychic Phenomenon and the Magical Power of Consciousness.
Conscious Connect. https://www.consciousconnectionmagazine.com/2022/01/de
an-radin/.
Radin, Dean, 2024. Personal Communication.
Ramachandran, V.S., 2019. What makes brains conscious? Closer to truth. closertotruth.
com/video/ramvs-008-2/?referrer=8069. V.S. Ramachandran on Closer To
Truth—10 CTT videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/co
ntributor/v-s-ramachandran/. .
Ransford, Emanuel, 2023. Quantum panpsychism and the light bulb metaphor. https://
galileocommission.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/Ransford-GC-Oct.23.pdf.
Reber, Arthur, 2016. Caterpillars, consciousness and the origins of mind. Anim.
Sentience 11 (1). https://doi.org/10.51291/2377-7478.1124.
Reber, Arthur, 2018. The First Minds: Caterpillars, Karyotes, and Consciousness. Oxford
University Press.
Reber, A.S., Alcock, J.E., 2020. Searching for the impossible: parapsychology’s elusive
quest. Am. Psychol. 75 (3), 391–399. https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000486.
Rees, Martin, 2007. Could our Universe.be a fake. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/brida-002/?referrer=8133.
Reggia, James, 2013. The rise of machine consciousness: studying consciousness with
computational models. Neural Network. 44, 112–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neunet.2013.03.011.
Rescorla, Michael, 2020. The computational theory of mind. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.),
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition). https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/fall2020/entries/computational-mind/.
Richie, Sarah Lane, 2021. Panpsychism and spiritual flourishing constructive
engagement with the new science of psychedelics. J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (No), 9–10.
Rickabaugh, Brandon, Moreland, J.P., 2023. The Substance of Consciousness: A
Comprehensive Defense of Contemporary Substance Dualism. Wiley-Blackwell.
Rivas, Titus, et al., 2023. The Self Does Not Die: Verified Paranormal Phenomena from
Near-Death Experiences, second ed. International Association for Near-Death
Studies.
Rivi`ere, Claude, 1987, 2005. Soul: concepts in indigenous religions. Translated from
French by G. P. Silverman-proust. Encycloped. Religion. https://www.encyclopedia.
com/environment/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcripts-and-maps/soul-concepts-indi
genous-religions.
Robinson, Howard, 2023. Dualism. In: Zalta, Edward N., Nodelman, Uri (Eds.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2023 Edition. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/spr2023/entries/dualism/.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
167
Rodriguez, E., et al., 1999 Feb 4. Perception’s shadow: long-distance synchronization of
human brain activity. Nature 397 (6718), 430–433. https://doi.org/10.1038/17120.
Rodriguez, Pablo, 2023. C-pattern theory: a new perspective on consciousness and
reality. Exmosol.
Roehrs, Phillip, Fenwick, Peter, Greyson, Bruce, et al., 2023. Terminal lucidity in a
pediatric oncology clinic, 2023 Sep. 21 J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.. https://doi.org/10.1097/
NMD.0000000000001711 (Online ahead of print).
Rooney, David, Patra, Sudip, 2022. Embracing weird: quantum context and quantum
social sciences. Mind Matter 20. Number 2, December 2022.
Rose, Steven, 2017. The ancient origins of consciousness by Todd Feinberg and Jon
Mallatt review—how the brain created experience. Guardian, 9 June 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/09/the-ancient-origins-of-concio
usness-todd-feinberg-and-john-mallet-review.
Rose, J.F.. Mind as a complex adaptive system. Medium. https://medium.com/illuminati
on/mind-as-a-complex-adaptive-system-92ff0bc2fc40.
Rosenberg, Alex, 2022. The rise of scientific atheism (Part II). Closer To Truth
closertotruth.com/video/rosal-012/?referrer=35922. Alex Rosenberg on Closer To
Truth—16 CTT videos and 5 CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.com/contributor
/alexander-rosenberg/.
Rosenberg, Alex, Dennett, Daniel, 2020. On Purpose. Collate. https://www.collate.or
g/discover/letters_to_someone.
Rovelli, Carlo, 2021. Relations and panpsychism. J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (9–10), 2021.
Rovelli, Carlo, 2022. Consciousness is irrelevant to quantum mechanics - an interview
with Carlo Rovelli. Instit. Art Ideas. https://iai.tv/articles/consciousness-is-irr
elevant-to-quantum-mechanics-auid-2187.
Rudrauf, David, Bennequin, Daniel, et al., 2017. A mathematical model of embodied
consciousness. J. Theor. Biol. 428. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2017.05.032, 2017
Sep. 7.
Ruffini, G., Salvador, R., Tadayon, E., Sanchez-Todo, R., Pascual-Leone, A.,
Santarnecchi, E., 2020. Realistic modeling of mesoscopic ephaptic coupling in the
human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol. 16 (6), e1007923 https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1007923, 2020 Jun 1.
Samarawickrama, Mahendra, 2023. Unifying matter, energy and consciousness. 11th Int.
Conf. Mathematic. Model. Phys. Sci. AIP Conf. Proc. 2872 https://doi.org/10.1063/
5.0162815, 110001-1–110001-5.
Samkhya, 2024. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 18 January
2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samkhya&oldid=1151847061.
Sanfey, John, 2023. Simultaneity of consciousness with physical reality: the key that
unlocks the mind-matter problem. Front. Psychol. 14 https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2023.1173653, 2023.
Sapolsky, Robert, 2023a. Determined: A Science of Life without Free Will. Penguin Press.
Sapolsky, Robert, 2023b. From Stanford to Medspire: an Exclusive Interview with Robert
Sapolsky. Medspire. https://medspire.net/en/interview-posts/from-stanford-to-
medspire-an-exclusive-interview-with-robert-sapolsky/.
Sarvapriyananda, Swami, 2020. Consciousness and self in Advaita Vedanta. Awakened
India 125 (1). https://advaitaashrama.org/pb/2020/012020.pdf.
Sarvapriyananda, Swami, 2023a. The Nature of the Human Person (Part 2). Closer To
Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/sarsw-005/?referrer=30182. Swami
Sarvapriyananda on Closer To Truth—15 CTT videos and 10 CTT TV episodes—
https://closertotruth.com/contributor/swami-sarvapriyananda/.
Sarvapriyananda, Swami, 2023b. Consciousness as Ultimate (Part 2). Closer To Truth. htt
ps://closertotruth.com/video/sarsw-003/?referrer=30215.
Schaffer, Jonathan, 2018. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), Monism. The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy, Winter 2018 Edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/e
ntries/monism/.
Schipper, Hyman, 2021. Kabbalistic Panpsychism: the Enigma of Consciousness in
Jewish Mystical Thought. Iff Books.
Schlitz, Marilyn, 2007. Why is ESP so intriguing? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/schma-015/?referrer=8391. Marilyn Schlitz on Closer To Truth—16 CTT
videos and 7 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/marilyn-sch
litz/.
Schneider, Susan, 2019a. Artificial You: AI and the Future of Your Mind. Princeton
University Press.
Schneider, Susan, 2019b. Would You Survive a Merger with AI? Nautilus. https://nautil.
us/you-wont-survive-a-merger-with-ai-237563/.
Schooler, Jonathan, 2002. Re-representing consciousness: dissociations between
experience and meta-consciousness. Trends Cognit. Sci. 6 (8).
Schooler, Jonathan, 2014. Bridging the objective/subjective divide: towards a
metaperspective of science and experience. In: Open MIND, (Frankfurt: Frankfurt Am
Main: MIND Group).
Schooler, Jonathan, 2022a. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/
video/schjn-005/?referrer=7453. Jonathan Schooler on Closer To Truth—12 CTT
videos and forthcoming CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/
jonathan-schooler/.
Schooler, Jonathan, 2022b. Can ESP make sense? Closer to truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/schjn-007/?referrer=8379.
Schooler, Jonathan, 2022c. Does ESP reveal the non-physical? Closer to truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/schjn-008/?referrer=8395.
Schooler, Jonathan, Mrazek, Michael, 2015. Minding the mind: the value of
distinguishing among unconscious, conscious, and metaconscious processes. In:
Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P.R., Borgida, E., Bargh, J.A. (Eds.), APA Handbook of
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 1. Attitudes and Social Cognition. American
Psychological Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/14341-005.
Schooler, Jonathan, Baumgart, Stephen, Franklin, Michael, 2018. Entertaining without
endorsing: the case for the scientific investigation of anomalous cognition. Psychol.
Conscious.: Theor. Res. Pract. 5 (1).
Schurger, Aaron, Sitt, Jacobo, Dehaene, Stanislas, 2012. An accumulator model for
spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2012. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.121046710.
Schwitzgebel, Eric, 2014. What is the mind-body problem? Closer To Truth -
closertotruth.com/video/scher-007/?referrer=8201. Eric Schwitzgebel on Closer To
Truth—9 CTT videos and 1 CTT TV episode—. https://closertotruth.com/contribut
or/eric-schwitzgebel/.
Searle, John, 1979. What is an intentional state? Mind. New Ser. 88 (349).
Searle, John, 1992. The Rediscovery of Mind. The MIT Press (Bradford Books).
Searle, John R., 2002. Consciousness and Language. Cambridge University Press.
Searle, John R., 2007a. Biological naturalism. In: Velmans, Max, Schneider, Susan (Eds.),
The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Blackwell.
Searle, John, 2007b. What things are conscious? Closer to truth. closertotruth.com/video/
seajo-013/?referrer=7787. John Searle on Closer To Truth—27 CTT videos and 17
CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/john-searle/. .
Searle, John, 2014a. Toward a science of consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closerto
truth.com/video/seajo-022/?referrer=7752.
Searle, John, 2014b. Language and consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/seajo-018/?referrer=8015.
Segal, Aaron, 2023. Person, Self, Soul, Spirit (Part III). Closer To Truth. https://closerto
truth.com/video/36445/?referrer=30153.
Segall, Matthew T., 2020. The varieties of physicalist ontology: a study in Whitehead’s
process-relational alternative. Philosophy, theology and the sciences. Mohr Siebeck
7 (1).
Sellars, Wilfrid, 1962. Philosophy and the scientific image. Frontiers of science and
philosophy. In: Robert Colodny, Robert. University of Pittsburgh Press.
Seth, Anil, 2007. Scholarpedia 2 (1), 1328. https://doi.org/10.4249/scholarpedia.1328.
Seth, Anil, 2021a. Being You: A New Science of Consciousness. Dutton. Personal
communication.
Seth, Anil, 2021b. Anil Seth on a new science of consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://c
losertotruth.com/video/anil-seth-on-a-new-science-of-consciousness/.
Seth, Anil, Bayne, Tim, 2022. Theories of consciousness. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. http://sro.
sussex.ac.uk/id/eprint/105030/1/SethBayne_NRN_accepted.pdf.
Shand, J., 2021. Consciousness: removing the hardness and solving the problem. Rev.
Port. Filosof. 77, 1279–1296.
Sheldrake, Rupert (n.d.b.) Morphic Resonance and Morphic Fields—an Introduction. htt
ps://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance/introduction.
Sheldrake, Rupert (n.d.a.) Technical papers on his website: https://www.sheldrake.org
/research.
Sheldrake, Rupert, 2007a. How much more to physical reality? Closer To Truth. http
s://closertotruth.com/video/sheru-002/?referrer=8245. Rupert Sheldrake on Closer
To Truth—5 CTT videos and 3 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/co
ntributor/rupert-sheldrake/.
Sheldrake, Rupert, 2007b. Is consciousness fundamental? Closer To Truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/sheru-006/?referrer=8141.
Sheldrake, Rupert, 2011. Dogs that Know when Their Owners Are Coming Home, revised
edition. Crown.
Sheldrake, Rupert, 2021. Is the sun conscious? J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (3–4).
Shinozuka, Kenneth, 2020. A big state-space of consciousness. Interview with Andreas
G´omez Emilsson. Qualia Comput. https://qualiacomputing.com/2020/01/18/a-
big-state-space-of-consciousness/.
Shyfrin, Eduard (n.d.) Kabbalah. Jerus. Post. https://www.jpost.com/kabbalah.
Retrieved: 18 March 2024.
Shyfrin, Eduard, 2019. From Infinity to Man: the Fundamental Ideas of Kabbalah within
the Framework of Information Theory and Quantum Physics. White Raven
Publishing.
Silcox, Mark (n.d.) Donald Davidson: Anomalous Monism. Internet Encycloped.
Philosop.. https://iep.utm.edu/donald-davidson-anomalous-monism/. Retrieved: 17
March 2024.
Sj¨ostedt-Hughes, Peter, 2022. Consciousness and psychedelics. Beyond belief. https
://substack.com/home/post/p-86037860 (Thanks to Alex Gomez-Marin for
suggesting Peter Sj¨ostedt-Hughes).
Sj¨ostedt-Hughes, Peter, 2023. On the need for metaphysics in psychedelic therapy and
research. Front. Psychol. 14 https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1128589, 30
March 2023.
Skipper, Jeremy, 2022. A voice without a mouth no more: the neurobiology of language
and consciousness. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 140. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0149763422002615.
Slezak, Peter, 2011. Review of matter and mind: a philosophical inquiry by Mario
Bungee. Sci. Educ. 21, 1213–1221. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191-011-9422-8,
2012.
Smart, J.J.C., 2007. The mind/brain identity theory. In: Zalta, Edward N., Nodelman, Uri
(Eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2022 Edition. https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/win2022/entries/mind-identity/.
Smith, Jonathan Z. (n.d.) Hellenistic religion. Encycloped. Britannic.. https://www.br
itannica.com/topic/Hellenistic-religion.
Smith, Huston, 2007. Enteral life is like what? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/video/
smihu-003/?referrer=7913. Huston Smith on Closer To Truth—8 CTT videos and 5
CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/video/smihu-003/?referrer=7913.
Smith, Barry, 2012. Language and consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/smiba-006/?referrer=8015.
Smithies, Declan, Stoljar, Daniel, 2012. Introspection and consciousness: an overview. In:
Smithies, Declan, Daniel, Stoljar (Eds.), Introspection and Consciousness. Oxford
University Press.
Smolin, Lee, 2020. On the Place of Qualia in a Relational Universe. PhilArchive. http
s://philpapers.org/archive/SMOTPO-3.pdf.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
168
Solms, Mark, 2019. The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle, 30
January 2019. Sec. Psychoanalysis and Neuropsychoanalysis Front. Psychol. 9. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714, 2018.
Solms, Mark, 2021a. The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness. W.
W. Norton & Company.
Solms, Mark, 2021b. Pr´ecis of the hidden spring: a journey to the source of
consciousness. J. Conscious. Stud. 28 (No), 11–12.
Soul, 2023. Theosophy Wiki. Date of last revision: 26 November 2023. https://theosophy.
wiki/en/Soul.
Spira, Rupert (n.d.) Website. https://rupertspira.com/non-duality/introduction-to-no
n-duality.
Stanowski, Mariusz, 2021. Theory and Practice of Contrast: Integrating Science, Art and
Philosophy. CRC Press.
Stapp, Henry, 2006. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness. Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kv7z7m4.
Stapp, Henry, 2007. Is consciousness an illusion (Part 1). Closer to truth. Henry Stapp on
Closer To Truth—9 CTT videos and 3 CTT TV episodes—. https://closertotruth.co
m/contributor/henry-stapp/.
Stapp, Henry, 2011. Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating
Observer, second ed. Springer.
Stapp, Henry, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 19 April
2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_Stapp.
Steiglitz, Kenneth, 2024. The Absurd Book of Consciousness: How to Enjoy the Mystery
and Raise Happy Robots. Carduelis Books. Personal communication.
Steiner, Rudolph, 1909. The Wisdom of the Soul, Consciousness and the Soul Life. The
Rudolf Steiner Archive. https://rsarchive.org/Lectures/GA115/English/AP1971/19
101104p01.html (Thanks to Paul Breslaw for suggesting Rudolph Steiner and to
Philip Kilner for helpful references).
Steiner, Rudolph, 1923a. The Evolution of Consciousness. The Rudolf Steiner Archive. htt
ps://rsarchive.org/Lectures/EvoConscious/EvoCon_index.html.
Steiner, Rudolph, 1923b. During Sleep and after Death (8), the Evolution of Consciousness.
The Rudolf Steiner Archive. https://rsarchive.org/Lectures/EvoConscious/1923082
6a01.html.
Steiner, Rudolf, 2024. Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 6 February
2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rudolf_Steiner&oldid=1204331
952.
Stent, Gunther, 1987. The mind-body problem: neurophilosophy. Toward a unified science
of the mind-brain. Science 236, 990. May 22, 1987. https://www.science.org/doi/
10.1126/science.236.4804.990.
Stevenson, Ian, 1997. Reincarnation and Biology: A Contribution to the Etiology of
Birthmarks and Birth Defects. Praeger, Westport, CT.
Stoljar, Daniel, 2010. Physicalism. Routledge.
Strawson, Galen, 2003. Real Materialism [with new postscript]. In: Antony, L.,
Hornstein, N. (Eds.), Chomsky and His Critics. Blackwell.
Strawson, Galen, 2008. Real Materialism and Other Essays. Clarendon Press.
Strawson, Galen, 2009. Realistic monism: why physicalism entails panpsychism.
J. Conscious. Stud. – January 2009.
Strawson, Galen, 2011. What is Panpsychism? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/strga-007/?referrer=8349. Galen Strawson on Closer To Truth—10 CTT
videos and 4 CTT TV episodes —https://closertotruth.com/contributor/galen-str
awson/.
Strawson, Galen, 2018. The Consciousness Deniers. New York Review of Books. April 4,
2018. https://www.nybooks.com/online/2018/03/13/the-consciousness-deniers/.
Strawson, David, 2019a. Underestimating the physical. J. Conscious. Stud. 26 (9–10),
2019.
Strawson, Galen, 2019b. Galileo’s Error by Philip Goff review – a new science of
consciousness. Guardian. Dec. 27, 2019.
Strawson, Galen, 2020a. What does “physical” mean? A prolegomenon to physicalist
panpsychism. In: Seager, W. (Ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism.
Routledge.
Strawson, Galen, 2020b. Mind and being: the primacy of panpsychism. In: Panpsychism:
Contemporary Perspectives. Brüntrup, Godehard; Jaskolla, Ludwig. Oxford University
Press.
Strawson, Galen, Bertrand, Russell, 2021. Oh you materialist! J. Conscious. Stud. 28
(9–10), 2021.
Stump, Eleonore, 1995. Non-cartesian substance dualism and materialism without
reductionism. Faith Philos. 12 (Issue 4).
Subramaniam, Ganapathy, 2023. Personal communications. https://www.ganapathysu
bramaniam.com/about.
Sutherland, Stuart, 1989. The International Dictionary of Psychology. Crossroads Classic.
Swimme, Brian, 2022. Cosmogenesis: An Unveiling of the Expanding Universe.
Counterpoint.
Swinburne, Richard, 2006. Interview with science and religion news on mind-body
dualism. https://users.ox.ac.uk/~orie0087/pdf_files/General%20untechnical%
20papers/Mind-Body%20Dualism.pdf.
Swinburne, Richard, 2007. How does personal identity persist through time? Closer To
Truth.. https://closertotruth.com/video/swiri-026/?referrer=8259.
Swinburne, Richard, 2013. Mind, Brain, and Free Will. Oxford University Press.
Swinburne, Richard, 2016. Personal Communication.
Synchronicity, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 1 July 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Synchronicity&oldid=1162823497.
Tabor, James, 1989. What the bible really says about the future. In: Smith, Morton,
Hoffmann, Joseph (Eds.), What the Bible Really Says. Prometheus Books.
Tabor, James, 2022. Understanding Hellenistic Dualism. TABORBLOG. https://
jamestabor.com/understanding-hellenistic-dualism/.
Tabor, James, 2023a. The best known/most forgotten classic new testament
study–resurrection vs. Immortality of the soul. TABORBLOG. https://jamestabor.
com/the-best-known-most-forgotten-classic-new-testament-study-resurrection-vs-
immortality-of-the-soul/.
Tabor, James, 2023b. Personal Communication.
TaborBlog, (n.d.). https://jamestabor.com.
Tabor, James, Wise, Michael, 1995. On resurrection’ and the synoptic gospel tradition: a
preliminary study. In: Qumran Questions. Charlesworth, James. Sheffield Academic
Press [Previously published in Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha, 10
(1992).].
Tallis, Raymond, 2009. Zhuangzi and that bloody butterfly. Philosophy Now – Issue 76.
http://www.philosophynow.org/issue76/Zhuangzi_And_That_Bloody_Butterfly.
Tallis, Raymond, 2010. You won’t find consciousness in the brain. New Sci. http
s://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20527427-100-you-wont-find-consciousne
ss-in-the-brain/.
Tallis, Raymond, 2011a. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/
video/talra-010/?referrer=7971. Raymond Tallis on Closer To Truth—26 CTT videos
and 7 CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/raymond-tallis/.
Tallis, Raymond, 2011b. Undiscovered. New Humanist, vol. 126, 4 July/August 2011.
Tallis, Raymond, 2023. The how & why of consciousness. Philos. Now. (159) https://ph
ilosophynow.org/issues/159/The_How_and_Why_of_Consciousness.
Tart, Charles, 1969. Altered States of Consciousness. John Wiley & Sons.
Tart, Charles, 1978a. Emergent interactionist understanding of human consciousness. In:
Shapin, Betty, Colu, Lisette (Eds.), Brain/Mind and Parapsychology: Proceedings of
an International Conference, 1978.
Tart, Charles, 1978b. Space, Time, and Mind. Research in Parapsychology 1977.
Scarecrow Press.
Tart, Charles, 1987. On the scientific study of other worlds. In: Weiner, D., Nelson, R.
(Eds.), Research in Parapsychology 1986. Scarecrow Press.
Tart, Charles, 2007. Does ESP reveal the nonphysical? Closer To Truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/tarch-005/?referrer=8395. Charles Tart on Closer To Truth—16 CTT
videos and 8 CTT TV episodes —https://closertotruth.com/contributor/charles-tart
/.
Tegmark, Max, 2014a. Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature of
Reality. Knopf.
Tegmark, Max, 2014b. Is mathematics eternal? (Part 1) closer to truth. https://closertotr
uth.com/video/tegma-016/?referrer=7985. Max Tegmark on Closer To Truth—46
CTT videos and 18 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/max
-tegmark/.
Tegmark, Max, 2014c. Why there is ‘something’ rather than ‘nothing’? (Part 2). Closer To
Truth. https://closertotruth.com/video/tegma-020/?referrer=7781.
Tegmark, Max, 2014d. Quantum Physics of Consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://clo
sertotruth.com/video/tegma-024/?referrer=7937.
Tegmark, Max, 2015. Consciousness is a state of matter. Chaos, Solit. Fractals 76.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1401.1219.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 1959. The Phenomenon of Man, Trans. Wall, Bernard. Harper
& Row.
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre, 1964. The Future of Man, Trans. Denny, Norman. Harper &
Row.
Templeton World Charity Foundation. (n.d.) “Accelerating Research on Consciousness:
Our Structured Adversarial Collaboration Projects.” https://www.templetonworldch
arity.org/accelerating-research-consciousness-our-structured-adversarial-collaborat
ion-projects.
Thagard, Paul, 2021. Bots and Beasts. The MIT Press.
Thagard, Paul, 2024. Dreams, Jokes, and Songs: How Brains Build Consciousness. Draft 3,
March 2024. University of Waterloo (Forthcoming).
The Observer, 1931a. Interviews with Great Scientists: No. 6 - Planck. January 25, 1931.
The Observer, 1931b. Interviews with Great Scientists: No. 4 - Schr¨odinger. January 11,
1931.
The Observer, 1931c. Interviews with Great Scientists: No. 1 – Eddington. January 11,
1930.
The Observer, 1931d. Interviews with Great Scientists: no. 8 – de Broglie. February 8,
1931.
Theosophy, 2023. Theosophy Wiki. https://theosophy.wiki/en/Theosophy.
Thompson, Evan, 2002. Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind.
Belknap Press.
Thompson, Evan, 2014. Waking, Dreaming, Being: Self and Consciousness in
Neuroscience, Meditation, and Philosophy. Columbia University Press.
Toker, Daniel., et al., 2024. Criticality supports cross-frequency cortical-thalamic
information transfer during conscious states. eLife 13, e86547. https://doi.org/
10.7554/eLife.86547.
Tononi, Giulio, 2014a. Why Scott should stare at a blank wall and reconsider (or, the
conscious grid). http://integratedinformationtheory.org/download/conscious_grid.
pdf.
Tononi, Giulio, 2014b. Is consciousness entirely physical? Closer To Truth. https://closer
totruth.com/video/tongi-002/?referrer=7957. Giulio Tononi on Closer To Truth—7
CTT videos and 2 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/giulio-t
ononi/.
Tononi, Giulio, 2014c. What things are conscious? Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/tongi-006/?referrer=7787.
Tononi, Giulio, Koch, Christof, 2015. Consciousness: here, there and everywhere? Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. B 370, 20140167. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2014.0167.
Tononi, Giulio, et al., 2022. Only what exists can cause: an intrinsic powers view of free
will. https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.02069.pdf.
Torday, John, 2022a. Consciousness, embodied quantum entanglement. Prog. Biophys.
Mol. Biol. 177 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2022.11.002, 2023.
R.L. Kuhn
Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 190 (2024) 28–169
169
Torday, John, 2022b. Evolution, gravity, and the topology of consciousness. Prog.
Biophys. Mol. Biol. 174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2022.06.005, 2022.
Torday, John, 2023. The holism of cosmology and consciousness. Prog. Biophys. Mol.
Biol. 177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2022.12.001, 2023.
Torday, John, 2024. The mobius strip, the cell, and soft logic mathematics. Prog.
Biophys. Mol. Biol. 186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2023.12.002, 2024.
Trafton, Anne, 2011. The Benefits of Meditation. MIT News. May 5, 2011. https://news.
mit.edu/2011/meditation-0505.
Tsuchiya, Naotsugu, Saigo, Hayato, 2021. A relational approach to consciousness:
categories of level and contents of consciousness, 2021 Neurosci. Consciousness 7
(2). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab034. I learned about Tsuchiya via George
Musser, 2023.
Tye, Michael, 2002. Representationalism and the transparency of experience. Noûs 36
(1).
Tye, Michael, 2019. Homunculi heads and silicon chips: the importance of history to
phenomenology. In: Pautz, Adam, Stoljar, Daniel (Eds.), Blockheads!: Essays on Ned
Block’s Philosophy of Mind and Consciousness. The MIT Press.
Tye, Michael, 2021. Vagueness and the Evolution of Consciousness: through the Looking
Glass. Oxford University Press.
Tye, Michael, 2023. A new solution to the hard problem of consciousness. Grzankowski,
Andy. Thought: its Origin and Reach, Essays for Mark Sainsbury. Routledge.
Valverde, Raul, Korotkov, Konstantin, Swanson, Chet, 2022. The quantum hologram
theory of consciousness as a framework for altered states of consciousness research.
NeuroQuantology 20 (3). https://spectrum.library.concordia.ca/id/eprint/991336/.
Van Gulick, Robert, 2019. Consciousness. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 Edition). https://plato.stanford.edu/arch
ives/sum2019/entries/consciousness/.
Van Heuveln, Bram, Dietrich, Eric, Oshima, Michiharu, 1998. Lett’s dance! The
equivocation in Chalmers’ dancing qualia argument. Minds Mach. 8.
Van Inwagen, Peter, 1995. Dualism and Materialism: Athens and Jerusalem? Faith and
Philosophy 12 (4).
Van Inwagen, Peter, 2007a. A materialist ontology of the human person. In:
Inwagen, Peter van, Zimmerman, Dean (Eds.), Persons - Human and Divine. Oxford
University Press.
Van Inwagen, Peter, 2007b. What is the nature of personal identity? Peter van Inwagen
on closer to truth—48 CTT videos and 28 CTT TV episodes. https://closertotruth.
com/contributor/peter-van-inwagen/.
Van Lommel, Pim, 2022. The Continuity of Consciousness: a concept based on scientific
research on near-death experiences during cardiac arrest. https://www.bigelowinst
itute.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/lommel-continuity-consciousness.pdf.
Varela, Francisco, 1996. Neurophenomenology: a methodological remedy for the hard
problem. J. Conscious. Stud. 3 (4).
Varela, Legacy, 2023. The legacy of Francisco Varela. J. Conscious. Stud. 30 (11–12).
December 2023. Issue dedicated to Varela.
Varela, Francisco, Rosch, Eleanor, Thompson, Evan, 1991. The Embodied Mind -
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. The MIT Press.
Velmans, Max, 2008. Reflexive monism. J. Conscious. Stud. 15 (2).
Velmans, Max, 2023. Wikipedia, the free Encyclopedia. Date of last revision: 1 June 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Max_Velmans.
Von Neumann, J., 1955. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 1932.
Princeton University Press, Princeton (Translated by Robert T. Beyer from the 1932
German original, Mathematiche Grundlagen der Quantummechanik. Berlin: J.
Springer.).
V¨or¨os, Sebastjan, 2023. At the cradle of things - the act of distinction and Francisco
Varela’s non-dualist thought. J. Conscious. Stud. 30 (1–2).
Wahbeh, H., Radin, D., Cannard, C., Delorme, A., 2022. What if consciousness is not an
emergent property of the brain? Observational and empirical challenges to
materialistic models. Front. Psychol. 13, 955594.
Wallace, David, 2016a. Physics of the Observer. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/walda-001/?referrer=7713. David Wallace on Closer To Truth—14 CTT
videos and 6 CTT TV episodes—. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/david
-wallace/.
Wallace, David, 2016b. Physics of consciousness. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/walda-006/?referrer=7736.
Wallace, David, 2016c. What Is Panpsychism. Closer To Truth.
Ward, Keith, 2006. Why immortal souls? Closer To Truth -. https://closertotruth.co
m/video/warke-023/?referrer=8169. Keith Ward on Closer To Truth—33 CTT videos
and 17 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/keith-ward/.
Ward, Keith, 2022. Personal Idealism. Fortress Press.
Weinberg, Steven, 1977. The First Three Minutes. Basic Books.
Weinberg, Steven, 2006. Closer to Truth—12 CTT videos and 13 CTT TV episodes. https
://closertotruth.com/contributor/steven-weinberg/.
Weir, Ralph, 2023. The Mind-Body Problem and Metaphysics: an Argument from
Consciousness to Mental Substance. Routledge.
Werner, Konrad, 2023. Enactment - a preliminary study in Varela and traditional
metaphysics. J. Conscious. Stud. 30, 11–12.
Wilber, Ken, 1995. Sex, Ecology, Spirituality: the Spirit of Evolution, Wilber. Shambhala.
Wilber, Ken, 1999. Integral Psychology: Consciousness, Spirit, Psychology, Therapy.
Shambhala.
Wilson, Clare, 2023. Brain Scans Are Putting a Major Theory of Consciousness to the
Test. New Scientist.
Wolfram, Stephen, 2021a. The concept of the ruliad. Stephen Wolfram Writings. htt
ps://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2021/11/the-concept-of-the-ruliad./.
Wolfram, Stephen, 2021b. What is consciousness? Some new perspectives from our
physics project. Stephen Wolfram Writings. https://writings.stephenwolfram.com
/2021/03/what-is-consciousness-some-new-perspectives-from-our-physics-
project./.
Wong, Carissa, 2023. Consciousness traced to specific clusters of nerve cells in the brain.
New Sci. 18 August 2023.
Woronko, Michael, 2020. Currents of consciousness, with Dr. Amit Goswami. Medium.
https://medium.com/borealism/currents-of-consciousness-with-dr-amit-goswam
i-96c154b26e2a.
Wu, Wayne, 2018. The neuroscience of consciousness. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 Edition. https://plato.stanford.edu
/archives/win2018/entries/consciousness-neuroscience/.
Xu, Y., Long, X., Feng, J., et al., 2023. Interacting spiral wave patterns underlie complex
brain dynamics and are related to cognitive processing. Nat. Human Behav. 7
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01626-5.
Yaden, David, Johnson, Matthew, et al., 2021. Psychedelics and consciousness:
distinctions, demarcations, and opportunities. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 24 (8)
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijnp/pyab026, 2021 Aug.
Yalowitz, Steven, 2021. Anomalous monism. In: Zalta, Edward N. (Ed.), The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archive
s/spr2021/entries/anomalous-monism/.
Yifa, Venerable, 2023. Consciousness as ultimate. Closer to truth. https://closertotruth.
com/video/yifve-009/?referrer=30155. Venerable Yifa on Closer To Truth—27 CTT
videos and 8 CTT TV episodes—https://closertotruth.com/contributor/venerable-dr
-yifa/.
Yu, Gino, 2013. What is Consciousness? Closer To Truth closertotruth.com/video/yugin-
003/?referrer=7827. Gino Yu on Closer To Truth—5 CTT videos and 1 CTT TV
episode. https://closertotruth.com/contributor/gino-yu/.
Yusuf, Hamza, 2023. Consciousness as Ultimate (Part 1). Closer To Truth. https://closert
otruth.com/video/yusha-004/?referrer=30155.
Zeki, Semir, 2019. Art and the philosophy of mind. Closer To Truth. https://closertotruth
.com/video/zekse-004/?referrer=7540.
Zhang, Ping, 2019. The second law of thermodynamic and human thinking. Acta Sci.
Neurol. 2. (Accessed 3 March 2019).
Zimmerman, Dean, 2005. Dualism in the Philosophy of Mind. Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
second ed. Macmillan Reference USA (referencing David Chalmers 1996).
R.L. Kuhn
